Preface: The Ages of Talumh
In the beginning, there was the One, and through its imaginings countless realties came to pass. In what is the blink of an eye to us, universes were born containing worlds, civilizations, and peoples too many to number. All of these passed before the One, and through them It knew all there was to know. As quickly as they came, these realities faded away, leaving all of existence as void. Contented, the one slumbered for eons beyond counting. 
As it dreamed, the One looked inward, and the dreams begat countless iterations of itself. Through time that was no time, these spirits were endowed with their own life force of a sort, reflections of the numberless visions experienced by their creator. Over millennia, they contended, fought, built, loved, and dreamed with each other. Through their strivings, a great civilization took shape, brining form to the Void for the first time without the will of the One. 
Over millennia more, the spirits were brought together into alliances, kingdoms, and finally, two great empires, one shining as the sun, and the other glimmering as the moon. Locked in contention with each other, these realms nonetheless relied on each other to survive, as only together could they retain the form they had given their world.  For an endless age the undying spirits learned, warred, and achieved, creating a civilization greater than all others before or since. 
Not all were content however. Two philosophical factions, one within each empire, arose which sought to overturn the order of things. One faction advocated that the spirits work together to create a new reality, outside the purview of the One.  The other sought to return to harness the collective power of the spirits to destroy the One once and for all, and claim reality as their own.  Heedless of the danger their actions posed, these factions sought to settle their differences in a great war, into which the empires were unwillingly drawn. 
This war, called the War of the Spirits, was unlike any other before it in scope, wreaking great devastation throughout the land and slowly dissolving the civilization that the spirits had worked countless ages to create. In their struggle to dominate each other, they had also offset the precarious balance of the cosmos that allowed their realm to exist, and the dreaming of the One slowly began to return all to void. As a last ditch effort to stave off oblivion, the champions on either side of the conflict worked together to capture those who had started the conflict in the first place, banishing them deep into the void. 
While the war had stopped and the balance had been regained, the world as the spirits knew it had been irreversibly changed. They knew it was only a matter of time before it too would final fade back into the dream of the One. Desperate to save the world they so loved, the spirits poured their life force into the structure of the world, sealing it for all time from the Void. As the spirits joined with a world given new and permanent form, new creatures were born of their essences, populating the world for the first time with life all its own. 
Two of their number they left as guardians for this new born land. These two great spirits set watch over the new peoples and creatures which had been born to the world, tending to them and to the land as a gardener tends to a garden. Using their vast powers they drew the last remaining city of their civilization into a secluded valley in the high mountains at the center of last continent, a place which they named Trí-na-nóg.

The Age of the Tuthá 
Into the world of Talumh, which the great spirits had chosen for the name of their new realm, were born a multitude of creatures. Many of these creatures had been endowed with the essence of the spirits which had created them, granting them sentience and free will. Many individuals of these new races worked together in harmony to build a new civilization. Many more, driven by their wild natures and accountable to no one, took what they wanted and preyed on those weaker than themselves. Best on all sides by violence, those who sought peace made a great pilgrimage to Trí-na-nóg to beg the protection of the great spirits who they called the Lord and the Lady. 
The Lord and the Lady made a great covenant with these pilgrims, who they entitled the Tuthá. In exchange for following their teachings, the great spirits endowed the Tuthá with magical powers from their own essences and according to the nature of each race.  They granted an even greater boon to the two most prominent leaders among the Tuthá – the gift of immortality. These two leaders would serve as emissaries of the Lord and the Lady among the Tuthá, and were each instructed to form their own courts and recruit followers from among the people. 
Empowered by the great spirits, the Tuthá were able to push back their violent and barbaric kin, many of whom gave up their savage ways to join in a new civilization. Those who refused to yield were slowly transformed into hideous monsters though a combination of their own bestial natures and the magic of the Tuthá. 
The courts formed by the leaders among the Tuthá: the Radiant Court led by Queen Glaréad, and the Glimmering Court, led by King Dwynnan. While monsters and ferocious beast continued to roam the wild lands between them, the many tribes of the Tuthá settled into a long and comfortable time of peace among themselves. Like the spirit empires who had come before them, the Courts saw each other as rivals, and competitions amongst them for land, prestige, resources, and influence were often fierce. Unlike their predecessors however, they also saw each other as kin, and while wars among them were not infrequent, their leaders would step in to negotiate peace when matters became dire. 

The Coming of Men 
While the great spirits struggled to save reality from oblivion and the Tuthá strove for mastery of the land, those who had been banished during the War of the Spirits did not sit idle. The faction that had called for the creation of a new reality, styling themselves the Exiles, cast about for new tools to realize their dreams of a new existence. Witnessing the covenant the Lord and the Lady had made with the Tuthá, they thought to make one of their own by seducing other creatures with power to use them as pawns to seize control of the world. Their efforts in this direction were to no avail however – while they could peer into the world their brethren had created, they could not community with or affect it. 
After a few centuries of finger pointing and blame shifting as they contended amongst themselves, one among the Exiles happened upon another plan. In his dreams, this spirit found he was able to travel into the imaginings of the One. Teaching this technique to the others, they searched the infinity of the Dream in the Void for suitable allies to draw into their scheme. They knew by the very nature of the Dream they would only be able to attempt this once, and thus their search was very careful and debate about the best candidate fierce among them. Eventually they settled on one creature they though best as a pawn for their schemes: Men. 
Shorter lived then the races of Talumh, Men were driven, adaptable, and over all, ambitious. In the depths of the Dream, the Exiles happened upon a large group of Men trapped on a dying world. Promising their salvation in return for servitude, they made a pact with these Men, drawing them through the Void and into Talumh, where they alighted on the western shores after passing through the mist. Initial contacts between Men and the Tuthá were not hostile at first as they were more curious about the newcomers than anything else. The numbers of Men soon began to swell however, and this peaceful co-existence and trading gave way to tension and eventually armed conflict after a few generations. 

The Great War
Five hundred years after their arrival in Talumh, Men had colonized and the nearly half of the western expanse of the continent. Inter-tribal wars among them saw the rise of six distinct Kingdoms. As these Kingdoms consolidated their power, they firmly supplanted the Tuthá as the dominate people of the region. The Tuthá did not take kindly to these advances, and many of them, especially among the Glimmering Court, called for open warfare to eliminate the human menace. 
Behind the scenes of this developing cold war, another power was moving in secret to bring its own vision into the world. The group of spirits who had contributed to the onset of the War of the Spirits, the faction in opposition to the Exiles, had also been plotting from their place of banishment deep in the Void. Unlike the Exiles however, these spirits, now styling themselves the Shadow Lords, had taken to preying on each other and thus became thoroughly corrupted. After a few centuries, only a dozen of these entities remained. Sensing their own destruction, these beings called a truce amongst themselves. While they were in no longer in any way united, they nonetheless worked on their own toward their shared goal.  Their vision of wresting control of the cosmos from the One had changed over the centuries of their imprisonment however – now they sought to unravel the universe and make it anew in their own image. 
One of the most powerful of these spirits, calling itself Penumbra, had come to realize the Shadow Lords would never be able to reach any of their goals if they did not seek to break out from their imprisonment. Under his leadership, the Lords were able to escape their place of banishment through the Dream, though like the Exiles they were not able to enter or directly affect the world created by their former kin.  They were however to utilize the Dream to influence and effect the only other outsiders who had penetrated into Talumh: Men. 
Though a campaign of subtle manipulation, the Shadow Lords began to influence the course of human history as soon as they landed on the shores of Talumh. During the age of the six kingdoms, Penumbra appeared to a number of Men who he had closely attuned to himself, gifting them a new type of powerful magic he and his followers had discovered in the Dream. This magic, unlike that of the Tuthá which was drawn from their own natures, drew instead on the power of the Void, manipulating through words and rituals, and items of power to energize its effects. Armed with this magic, Penumbra’s human followers conquered the six kingdoms, forming a vast empire which sought to control all of Talumh. In a few short years the forces of this empire struck out, devastating the Tuthá and pushing them further into east with each passing year. 
The Lord and the Lady had thus far taken a neutral stance toward Men, hoping to allow their followers to deal with the threat these newcomers posed. Terrified by the magical power Men had gleaned from the Shadow, the decided to personally intervene in the conflict. They drew to them the all of the Tuthá, and in the hidden mountain valley near Trí-na-nóg they fought the massed armies of the Empire of Man in a titanic battle lasting five days. While the Tuthá were greatly outnumbered, the might of the Lord and the Lady was not to be denied, nor was the Tuthá’s magical power. 

A New Age
After the defeat of their magical champions, the human armies began to crumble and flee. Many tens of thousands were captured, but many more still escaped, only to perish by the score in the mountains. Fueled by vengeance, the Tuthá swept into the realms of Men, capturing all they could find and slaying any who resisted. With the majority of humanity in cantonment, debate raged among the Tuthá as to what to do with them. Those of the Glimmering Court felt it their right to enslave mankind, where as those of the Radiant Court though it best to build ships for them and send them back to whence they came. 
The debate was settled in the end by the Lord and the Lady. They decided that as the majority of Men were not responsible for the crimes of their leaders, they should have the opportunity to live free. Never again would they be allowed to threated the Balance in such a way however. To this end, they scattered the remaining Men into twelve distinct communities throughout Talumh, each far removed from the other. 
Two hundred years has passed since the end of the Great War, and the agreement imposed on Man, called the Settlement, has maintained peace throughout these centuries. They and the Tuthá have again learned to live together, if at least a semblance of harmony. A new age has dawned on Talumh for all the races, and while the people of this land are no longer at war, the Exiles and the Shadow Lords have begun to plot again, and factions among Men and Tuthá are again stirring up mutual antagonism. Will this land see another great war, or will this newfound peace last? Only the decisions of those made in this time will shape what is to come. 

Peoples of Talumh
The peoples of Talumh are generally divided into three distinct groups. They are: Men, Tuthá, and others, which are usually referred to as Denizens. Each of these groups are made up of several distinct races, each with their own physiology and cultures. 
Races of Men
The Men of Talumh are descendants of those drawn out of the Void from the Exiles and brought here to serve as their agents. In the more than seven centuries since their arrival, no race of mortal beings have had as strong an impact on Talumh, a trend which will likely continue as long as they exist here. 
Men are divided into three distinct races based on their ancestry: the race of Men itself, the races of Halflings, whose bloodlines arose from Manish and Gnomish ancestry, and Dwarfs, who were Men corrupted by the magical influence of the Shadow Lords.  While in the past Halflings and Dwarfs were considered little but half-breeds, they now represent a distinct race of their own that breeds true. Also included among the races of Men are the so-called Feytouched. These individuals are Men who have a Tuthá bloodline as part of their recent ancestry. 
Though they have aligned themselves with the Courts of the Tuthá, Gnomes are also considered a race of Men, as their bloodline originally stemmed from that of Men. 
Men
Direct descendants of those who washed up on Talumh’s shores after being rescued from the Void by the Exiles, Men are a collectively dynamic people. While the isolation brought on by the settlement has forced each human society to diverge from the others culturally, Men everywhere are nonetheless more alike than dissimilar. Within these cultures however, individuals run the gamut of emotional temperament and personal ideals, making Men easily the most complex of the mortal races.  As they brought now written records with them to Talumh, the true history of Man is lost to them, surviving today as folklore and myth. This makes Men a race still struggling to define itself after almost a millennia in this world. 
Personality: Men are an intelligent, ambitious, and highly adaptable people. With a shorter lifespan than nearly all the other mortal races, Men are often driven to leave their mark in the world by bold action and innovation. For every Man empowered by bold ambition however is one just as likely to want nothing more than a comfortable life. While the mores of a particular culture have a strong impact on who Men view the world and act in it, they are at their core highly individualistic, and ruled as much by their intellect as their emotions. To try to define the usual modes of behavior for many of the races of Talumh who be a complex and arduous exercise – to try to do so for Men would be impossible.  
Physical Description: Since their arrival on Talumh, the physical makeup of Men as a species has changed very little.  The group pulled into their world by the Exiles, numbering some five thousand souls, was drawn from a single ethnic and cultural group. Thus, Men remain much like each other, with very few regional variations. Men stand an average of five and a half feet tall and weigh an average of 130 pounds.  Males are often being somewhat taller and bulkier than the norm, and females often being somewhat shorter and slimmer.  To say than anything is average in the sizes and shapes of Men is a misnomer however – they display an extremely wide variety of body shapes, more so than any other race. Most Men tend toward an olive-skinned complexion with dark hair and eyes, thought lighter colorations are not uncommon. With the shortest lifespan of any of the mortal races, Men mature quickly, being fully grown and developed toward the end of their second decade. Most lead lives of toil and hardship, rarely living more than forty years or so. Those who enjoy a comfortable life and good nutrition have been known to live upwards of sixty years or longer. 
Relations: Men have a mixed relationship with the other mortal races of Talumh. Their relationships with the Tuthá in particular vary depending on each human culture’s outlook. In general, fey who adhere to the Radiant Court have a better relationship with Men, whereas those who follow the Glimmering Court are more antagonistic. Individuals within each culture often break these rules however, based on their shared experiences. Their dealings with other races are considerably more mixed, dependent on how communities and individuals interact with each other. 
Alignment: Men run the gamut of alignments, and tend toward no one path in particular, not even neutrality. Both the best and the worst can be found among them. 
Human Lands: The Settlement divided the population of Men who survived the Great War into seven communities, each distinct and geographically remote from each other. Over the past two hundred years, these communities have grown and expanded, and even begun limited contacts with each other. The lands that a particular human hails from will have a strong impact on their outlook and approach toward life (See chapter 3 for more details). 
Religion: Traditional human folk beliefs, those which they brought with them to Talumh, play only a minor part of their lives daily lives. Since coming to these lands, many Men have taken up other belief systems, or invented new ones based on their experiences here. In general, most Men adhere to their ancient path, most often referred to as Spiritualism, or the Path of Light. Some of the newer paths they have embraced include the Shining Path, based on a spiritual connection to the Exiles, the Path of Man, a sect unknowingly influenced by the Shadow Lords, and the Greensigers, a sect that is comprised of ancient Tuthá customs, with a Manish influence (see chapter 4 for more details or religions of Talumh).  
Language: Men speaking Manish, their native tongue which they brought with them to Talumh. Many words in Manish are taken from or influenced by a different ancestral tongue whose name is now lost to history. Men refer to this predecessor language as the Old Tongue. While many personal names and place names from the Old Tongue are still in use today, a true understanding of it no longer exists. Written Manish uses its own alphabet, believed to be based on the Old Tongue. This script varies greatly from the elfish runic script used by the Tuthá. 
Names: With a somewhat high rate of infant mortality in most places, children are traditionally not named until their second birthday. The mother of a child has the right to name her children in most human cultures. First names are mixed in character. Generally, a child will be given a name taken from a noteworthy ancestor. These names are often from the Old Tongue, and like many words from this ancestor language, few of their meanings are well understood today. Men will just as often name their children after friends, natural objects, or other such things that catch their fancy. Surnames are most often associated with a particular profession. As Men usually take great pride in the works of their hands, these names are commonly passed down to their descendants regardless of whether or not they take up their family trade. A number of Old Tongue family names remain among Men, names which are guarded most jealously. Some examples of Manish names are outlined below: 
Old Tongue Male Names: 	
Aien, Ban, Cai, Dan, Kael, Lan, San, Sten, Tam, Van 
Old Tongue Female Names: 	
Alis, Kira, Jen, Nala, Nan, Sona
Other Male Names: 		
Bard, Sage, Victor
Other Female Names: 		
Lilly, Lyric, Poppy, Rose, 
Old Tongue Surnames: 		
Aurik, Domar, Keil, Taman
Common Surnames: 		
Carpenter, Farmer, Fisher, Smith, Wright
Adventurers: Men adventure for a variety of reasons from a desire for fame and fortune, to simple wanderlust, to personal quests of any sort. Curious and innovative by nature, many Men travel and explore to push the boundaries of their understanding of the world. 
Human Racial Traits
Size: Medium – as medium sized creatures, Men receive no special bonuses or penalties due to their size. 
Base Speed: 30 feet
Bonus Feat: Because they are quick to master tasks and special skills, Men receive a bonus feat at 1st level in addition to any other feat they receive as part of their character class, and the feat all 1st level characters recieve. 
Bonus Skill Points: Driven to excel, Men work harder than most to master the skills they have learned. Human characters receive 4 additional skill points at first level, and 1 additional skill point at each level. 
Favored Class: Any – When determining an experience point penalty for multi-classing, a human character’s highest class level does not count. 
Languages: All Men start with Manish as a free language, and one other bonus language of their choice. This choice is based on the region which they hail from (see chapter 3). 
Halflings
Halflings, or Smallfolk as they prefer to call themselves, are a race of Men whose bloodline has been mixed with that of Gnomes. While hundreds of years ago Halflings were considered little but half-breeds, they have since become a race onto themselves. Having come into their own over the last two hundred years, the Smallfolk have gone from a race of scavengers and survivors to a people content to enjoy a comfortable existence away from the cares and struggles of the world at large. 
Physical Description: Much smaller than Men but larger and somewhat stouter than their Gnomish cousins, Halflings stand on average 3 ½ feet tall and weigh an average of 45 pounds. While they have a somewhat stocky appearance, Halflings are in fact an extremely nimble and surefooted people that move with surprising grace, no doubt courtesy of their fey heritage. They have retained their coloration from their Manish ancestors, though they typically are somewhat lighter skinned and have a rosy complexion. Fair colored hair and lighter eyes are more common among Smallfolk than Men, though still the exception and not the rule. No matter their stripe, Smallfolk are almost universally comely, and it is rare indeed to see an ugly Halfling. Unlike Men, Halflings do not grow much in the way of facial hair, though thick sideburns among males are common. Of particular note are their feet, which are larger and wider (for their size of course) than those of Men, and also feature a prominent tuft of curly hair. Halflings age slower than Men, again likely due to of their fey ancestry, maturing around the end of their third decade of life, and generally live to be a hundred years or more. 
Personality: Due to their mixed heritage, Halfling personalities are a study in contrasts. While they enjoy and take great pride in hard work and are quite industrious, they are equally famous for their love of leisure and contentment. Smallfolk have a cherished love of art, especially music and storytelling. Halfling gatherings often feature bouts of song and tall tales, and of course, food, which is their chief indulgence. It is said that a Halfling will have seven meals a day whenever they can get them.  Most Halflings are content to enjoy the well eared fruits of life in peace. While most are not driven to explore the world, Halflings are nonetheless intense curious about it. Visitors to Halfling lands can be expected to be peppered with endless questions about the goings on of the world outside their borders, and are often surprised to learn that these provincial folk know more about the events of the world than they do!  
Relations: Halflings are on good relations with the other races of Talumh in general. Men consider them to be somewhat bothersome, and among human communities they have a reputation as being thieves and scavengers. The Tuthá, on the other hand, view the Smallfolk as kin, and most often treat them as such. 
Alignment: With a strong sense of racial identity and community, Halflings tend toward good and neutral alignments. Those with more chaotic tendencies are easily tolerated, as long as they pull their own weight, though Smallfolk with these beliefs are often more comfortable as wandering Tinkers or as part of a larger human or (especially) Tuthá society. Halflings that subscribe to an evil philosophy, a rarity to be sure, will find themselves marginalized by Halfling society at large. Those who refuse to reform are most often banished from their communities. 
Halflings Lands: Halflings existing for a long time as outcasts on the outskirts of human communities. To Men they were most often considered a nuisance and had to make do with whatever they could steal or beg to survive. Since the settlement, they have formed a community of their own, secure from the dangers of the wider world. The majority of Halflings live in the twelve townships that make up the land of Goodlund. This wide, fertile valley enjoys a mild climate, and is well defended from the predators, monsters, and other dangers that lurk in the wilderness that surround it. While their lands are well-guarded, the Halflings of Goodlund are always happy to welcome trades with goods to sell, or especially travelers with a good tale to tell. In addition to the folk of Goodlund, a number of Halfling clans have taken up the life of nomadic travelers and traders. These Halflings call themselves Tinkers. Tinkers are often a welcome sight in communities of any type as they are renowned for their ability to fix almost anything that is broken, and most carry news of the wider world to more isolated locales. Small communities of Halflings also exist within or on the outskirts of larger human or Tuthá settlements. The composition of these enclaves and their relationships with the larger communities they are a part of varies by region, though Men tend to treat them as a nuisance, and the Tuthá tend to treat them as brothers.  
Religion: Most Smallfolk practice a folk religion similar to that of Men, but with an emphasis on the Great Spirits rather than a single divine. Like Men, this religious practice does not have a strong influence on Halfling society. In general, Halflings are tolerant, if somewhat dismissive of the religion practices of others. Few Halflings have taken up religious paths other than their own. 
Language: Halflings speak a dialect of Manish which can be a little difficult to grasp for first time listeners. The Halfling dialect has retained few if any of the words common to Manish borrowed from the Old Tongue, instead utilizing a sprinkling of Gnomish words. 
Names: Halfling personal names are a mixed bag of Manish names and Gnomish names (both adapted to their own dialect of course). Halflings are not bound by tradition when naming a child, and will also often make up a name that pleases them, typically something whimsical or sing-song in nature. Surnames are somewhat more serious to the Smallfolk. These names are Clan names, often taken from a geographic feature, natural phenomenon, or anything else that pleases the clan’s founder. Large clans often use the name of their township along with their clan name to better identify individuals. For example, a Halfling named Otho of the Proudfoot clan from the village of Whiteshore would refer to himself as “Otho, of the Whiteshore Proudfoots” 
Male Names: 		
Bilbo, Cade, Garret, Milo, Lyle, Otho, Tom
Female Names: 		
Cora, Garnet, Lobelia, Lilly, Poppy, Purdy, Miranda, Rose, Vera, Ursula  
Clan Names: 	
Birdlebough, Burrows, Cousins, Greenleaf, Goodbarrel, Highhill, Proudfoot, Underhill, Whitewater
Adventurers: Despite their penchant to seek out contentment, the Smallfolk have at heart retained the insatiable curiosity of their human forbearers. Young Halflings often take up adventuring to slake their wanderlust before settling down into adult life. Many find they enjoy this life and end up being adopted into a Tinker clan, or even traveling as a way of life. Halfling travelers are usually welcomed in communities of any type as they often carry new of the broader world. Traveling Halflings have a reputation as shrewd merchants and as excellent agents for hire as intermediaries or messengers. 
Halfling Racial Traits
Ability Score Adjustment: Dexterity +2, Charisma +1, Constitution -1, Strength -2. Halflings are comely, friendly, quick, and agile. Smaller than their human counterparts, they are less physically strong and robust. 
Size: Small. As small creatures, Halflings receive a +1 dodge bonus to their AC, and a +1 bonus on all attack rolls. They use smaller weapons than humans and Dwarfs however, and their carrying capacity is three-quarters of that of a medium sized creature. 
Base Speed: 20 feet
Skill Bonuses: Halfling characters receive a number of racial skill bonuses: 
?	Being partially fey in nature, Halflings have an inborn connection with the wild places of the world. This gives them a +2 bonus on all checks with the Move Silently and Hide skills. Increase this bonus to +4 when such checks are performed outdoors.  
?	Being naturally athletic and surefooted, Halflings receive a +2 bonus when using the Climb and Jump skills. 
?	Halflings have keen senses, and receive a +2 bonus to checks with the Listen skill, and a +1 bonus with the Spot and Search skills. 
Morale Bonus: Despite their small size, Smallfolk are utterly fearless when forced to defend themselves. They thus receive a +2 bonus to all morale checks taken against fear based abilities or attacks.
Lucky: Halflings are intrinsically lucky, and receive a +1 bonus to all saving throws.   
Thrown Weapon Bonus: In addition to their natural dexterity, Halflings also frequently use of thrown objects are part of many games.   This gives them a +1 racial bonus with all thrown weapons. 
Languages: Manish and Gnomish. Many Halflings that live near communities of other folk often learn their languages as a matter of course. 
Favored Class: Rogue – A Halfling’s levels in the Rouge class do not count when determining if they receive an experience point penalty. 

Dwarfs
Soon after Men arrived on the shores of Talumh, they began to hear from their Tuthá neighbors tales of great wealth in hidden in the western Yashim Mountains. It was said that great veins of ores and precious metals lay untapped there, glittering gemstones, and buried treasures from the earlier age of the world. Drawn by the promise of this wealth, bold and adventurous Men began to flock to the mountains to try their luck in this unforgiving wilderness. The heartiest of these stayed, delving deeper and deeper into the mountains, into the deep places of the world where only the mysterious Dark Elves dwell. Surprising to all, perhaps themselves included, these Men stuck up a lasting friendship with these Tuthá. Perhaps because of the magical influence of the Dark Elves, or perhaps due to the magic inherent to the dark places below the world, these Men began to change, becoming far different from their sunlight dwelling kin. When the call came out for these scattered clans beneath the mountains to join the great crusade against the Tuthá, these dwellers in the dark instead shut their gates, retreating beneath rock and earth to wait out the coming storm. There they have developed a society all their own, one much different from that which they knew in the upper world they have largely left behind.  
Physical Description: The main difference between Dwarfs and their Manish ancestors is their shorter, stockier stature. The term “dwarf” was initially an insult Men used to mock these people, an insult which they parleyed into a title they now wear with pride. Dwarfs stand on average four feet tall and weigh an average of two hundred pounds. This extra weight is not generally fat however, quite the contrary. Dwarfs are considerably denser than Men, and have a great deal more muscle on their heavy-boned frames. Dwarfish skin tone is almost universally pale, with a markedly ruddy complexion. Another major difference between Dwarfs and Men is in terms of body hair. Dwarfs are very hairy and take great pride in their facial hair in particular. Dwarfish women, while they (usually) do not grow full beards, are possessed of prominent side whiskers. Dwarfs mature more slowly than Men, being fully grown around the middle of their second decade. They are also somewhat longer lived, living an average of 150 years.     
Personality: Exposed to the magic of the deep world for so many generations, many of the hallmarks of their Manish ancestors have been greatly exaggerated in Dwarfs. Generally speaking, they are an industrious, proud, and honorable folk who greatly value honest work and are extremely devoted to their communities. Unfortunately, some of the more negative aspects of Men have been enhanced in them as well. For example, they tend to be stubborn to a fault, clannish, greedy, mistrustful of outsiders, and have a penchant for being arrogant about the quality of their own crafts. Dwarfs are divided into six clans, familial units to which they are almost fanatically devoted. While these clans function together as part of a unified society, they are often at odds with each other and given to bitter rivalries. Though these clan are often at odds with each other, woe to the outsider who seeks to interfere with their feuds, for the Dwarfs also possess an inherent sense of racial unity when it comes to dealing with interlopers. 
Alignment: Dwarfs tend toward neutral and lawful alignments. Those of good and evil persuasions are tolerated, if often ridiculed, as long as they are able to get along in society without causing too much trouble. People of chaotic alignment are usually tolerated as well, though somewhat less so. 
Relations: Dwarfs are a secretive and guarded people, who generally speaking shun contact with the outside world. The only major exceptions to this are the Dark Elves and Gnomes, with whom their share a common subterranean home, and Halflings, whom they often trust as intermediaries to move their wares. Men have a negative opinion of the Dwarfs, stemming from the Dwarfish failure to come to their aid during the Great War. Only now after several centuries have passed is the sting of this betrayal beginning to fade, though both races continue to view each other with extreme suspicion. Relations with the Tuthá, Gnomes in particular, are considerably better, though the Dwarfs have a hard time taking the more flight and capricious of the fey seriously. 
Dwarfish Lands: The Yashim Holdfast, a federation of Dwarfish states spread throughout the Yashim Mountains, is home to the vast majority of Dwarfs today. This state consists of the six major clanholds and associated settlements, along with a small capital city which is used to govern the state, and as a place for free trade between the clans. The Holdfast is a closed land – only Dwarfs or those permitted passage by them are allowed to roam free here. Those caught in Dwarfish lands without permission are most often banished for life, though those they consider dangerous may be arrested or even executed outright. That being said, the Dwarfs only truly control the underground of their realm. The surface of the mountains is infested with Goblins, harpies, clans of Minotaurs and Trolls, and a variety of various monsters. This suits the Dwarfs just fine, as it serves as a deterrent to those who would venture into their lands. The Dwarfish state maintains a small trading city on the outskirts of their mountain holdfast, a place which is used to trade directly with Men and Tuthá. (more on this state in Chapter 3).
Religion: Dwarfs venerate the Lord, whose worship they picked up from their Elfish neighbors. While not overly religious, Dwarfs do often invoke the Lord in their daily lives, and often pray or sacrifice to him before beginning any significant undertaking. Some Dwarfs have been known to take up a life of religious devotion, and the Lord will often grant them his favor in return for their faith. Other religions are barely tolerated within Dwarfish society. While they will benignly ignore the religious leanings of welcome visitors, a Dwarf who takes up an alternate religious path will most often be shunned by their society.  
Language: Dwarfs speak Dwarfish, a dialect of Manish that has evolved from their long subterranean sojourn, and their contact with the Dark Elves and other Tuthá. While not completely indistinguishable from Manish, the two languages are almost completely unintelligible to native speakers of either and can only be truly comprehended with much patience and study. The Dwarfish language has surprisingly retained many words from the Old Tongue of Manish, even more than modern Manish itself. 
Names: Dwarfish individuals have three names: a given name or “face” name, a clan name, of which there are six, and a chosen name or “true” name, which they choose for themselves at their coming of age ceremony. Dwarfs have a strong superstitious belief in the power of their true names, and will never willingly give them out to any except their immediate family and close associates. It is considered extremely taboo to speak the true name of yourself or another Dwarf except in the strictest privacy. Given names show only a modicum of variation, often being ones carried in the family for generations or taking the form of natural phenomena. Dwarfs also have a long standing custom of namesaking, giving their children the names of famous direct ancestors, or especially close friends. With only so many clan names, this can often lead to confusion among those a Dwarf is not closely acquainted with. This has given rise to the Dwarfish custom of using the names of their two closest ancestors at first meeting or during formal occasions. Dwarfs trace their lines matriliernally, so they will most often name their mother and their mother’s mother when introducing themselves. For example, a Dwarf named Garnet from the Stonehammer clan would introduce herself as “Garnet, daughter or Beryl, daughter of Kya, of the Stonehammer Clan”.

Male Names: 		
Drago, Edrick, Flint, Gunnar, Jasper, Karl, Morin, Torin, Ulfgar
Female Names: 		
Aeofie, Elfwine, Glitter, Beryl, Hilde, Garnet, Gunnola, Sapphire
Clan Names: 	
Feldspar, Ironhorn, Slate, Stonehammer, Whiteforge 
Adventurers: By and large, Dwarfs rarely venture outside of their homelands. Those that do are most often outcasts or exiles. The rare Dwarf with a taste for adventure will find their way into the world as a wandering merchant or soldier of fortune. Many Dwarfs who find themselves away from home for whatever reason often take up their trades in other communities, where they enjoy a reputation as crafters of goods of the highest quality. 
Dwarf Racial Traits
Ability Score Adjustment: Constitution +2, Charisma -2. Dwarfs are an incredibly hardy folk, but are often ruff and taciturn.  
Size: Medium. As medium creatures, Dwarfs receive no bonuses or penalties due to their size. 
Base Speed: 20 feet. Unlike other creatures, Dwarfish characters continue to move at their base speed even when wearing medium or heavy armor, or carrying a medium or heavy load. 
Skill Bonuses: Dwarfish characters receive a number of racial skill bonuses: 
?	+2 bonus using the Search skill to detect unusual stonework such as new construction, stonework traps, unsafe surfaces, and similar circumstances. Dwarfs can make a search roll by coming within 10 feet of such stonework. 
?	+2 bonus when using the Appraise skill on metal or stonework items
?	+2 bonus on Craft checks when constructing objects from metal or stone
AC Bonus: Dwarfs receive a +4 dodge bonus to their AC against creatures of the Giant subtype such as Trolls or Akki. 
Attack Bonus: Dwarfs receive a +1 attack bonus against creatures with the goblinoid subtype such as Goblins and Hobbs. 
Toxin Resistance: Dwarfs receive a +2 bonus to fortitude saving throws against poison or toxic effects. 
Subterranean Sense: Dwarfs have an intuitive sense of direction beneath the earth and can determine their general direction and relative depth underground by making an intelligence check against DC 10. 
Darkvision: Dwarfs have darkvision with a range of 60 feet. 
Stability: Dwarfs are extremely stable on their feet. They receive a +4 bonus to resist being tripped or bull rushed when standing firmly on the ground. 
Languages: Dwarfish and Manish. Many Dwarfs also learn a smattering of Elfish of Gnomish.  
Favored Class: Fighter – A Dwarf’s levels in the Fighter class do not count when determining if they receive an experience point penalty. 

Feytouched 
Editor’s Note: Feytouched take the place of Half-Elves in a Talumh campaign. 	
Since their arrival on Talumh, the destiny of Men has been bound up with that of their Tuthá neighbors. From time to time, weather do to compulsion, force, or even in rare cases, love, their bloodlines have become mixed. While many of those born from these unions live their lives as normal member of their respective races, some of the time the traits of both creatures can become mixed, resulting in a type of being alike to both of its bloodlines, but separate from both. These are the Feytouched. Feytouched result from the union of Men and true fey among the Tuthá including Faeries, Kelpies, Dryads, and Nymphs, or more rarely, Elves. While a Feytouched will be born most often from a direct coupling, these traits can occasionally manifest even into the fourth generation. Tuthá parents of Feytouched often give them up, believing (usually rightly) these children would be worse off among their brethren. Some seek to reunite them with their human kin, often donating them anonymously to childless parents, or even switching them out for a sickly or dying newborn.  Others give them to other communities willing to raise them such as Halflings, Gnomes, or rarely, Dwarfs. Human parents rarely discover their children are Feytouched until they begin to grow or mature. Those is superstitious cultures will sometimes abandon them to die in the wild if their nature is discovered early, those these unfortunates are rescued by the Tuthá more often than not.  
Physical Description: The outward appearance of Feytouched is inherently similar to that of Men, though they often evince lighter coloration and complexion and are much more given to fairer eyes and hair the most Men. Feytouched are often smaller, slimmer, and lighter than the majority of Men. They also manifest a number of unusual traits that separate them from baseline humans such as long, spindly limbs, slightly pointed ears, eyes with two different colors, and a host of other changes. The appearance of Feytouched are often striking, making them clearly stand out among their peers and giving them an unearthly aura. Feytouched also mature more slowly than Men, and enjoy a longer life expectancy, often living to be two hundred years old. 
Personality: Feytouched tend to be less serious and studious than their Manish brethren, often given to daydreams and flights of fancy. They are called the natural places of the world, often shirking their responsibilities to frolic in forests, meadows, or along rivers. Their inherent connection with the natural world gives them a strong connection with animals of all types, and as they are usually sidelined among human communities, Feytouched often turn to animals for companionship. Feytouched have little care for the worries or works of society in general, though when they find a craft or practice they enjoy they often go to it with a will and a single-minded determination their human companions struggle to match. Feytouched are artist and artisans without peer, and find great joy in creating masterwork crafts and artistic works. Much like many other aspects of the Feytouched however, their art can make Men uncomfortable due to its otherworldly nature however.  Overall, their personalities are governed by the very contradiction of their being. Feytouched who grow up in Tuthá communities are much less ostracized, though their human-ness marks them as others from their kin. 
Alignment: Feytouched tend strongly toward chaotic and neutral alignments, and it is extremely rare to meet one of a lawful persuasion.  With respect to good and evil, they don’t gravitate toward either side – the vast majority of them fall along the neutral end of the spectrum, but it is not rare to find one of an evil or good alignment based on their personalities and experiences. 
Relations: In general, the Feytouched are loners and outsiders, little understood by the larger societies in which they dwell, and caring little about them in return. Rarely if ever can these individuals be called productive members of society, though those that take up a beloved craft can earn a living for themselves in most communities. Men generally shun the Feytouched, considering them contaminated, otherworldly, and unlucky. Superstitious cultures will often persecute them and ascribe their presence to any number of misfortunes. While they find more welcome among the Tuthá, and other races such as Halflings and Gnomes, Feytouched are usually marked as outsiders wherever they go. 
Feytouched Lands: By and large, Feytouched exist on the fringes of other societies. While many find a welcome home among the Tuthá or other races, most have taken to living on the outskirts of other civilizations, or living as hermits deep in the wilderness places they love. A decade ago, a bold group of Feytouched adventurers founded a settlement in Twilight Vale in the mountains north of the fabled city of Trí-na-nóg. Over the past ten years, this settlement has drawn more and more of these people, and for the first time in history the Feytouched have a place to call home. Children born here to Feytouched parents, something almost unheard of in former times, have universally shown the traits of their forbearers. Many among this community hope that this heralds the dawn of a true race of their own. 
Religion: Feytouched often take up the religious paths of their parents, though usually halfheartedly. Many have turned to the Greensingers, as this group shares their veneration or nature. Those raised in Tuthá communities often worship the Lord or the Lady, depending on which court they are brought up in.  Some few have taken up the Shining Path, and perhaps contrary to their inconstant nature, those who have are often drawn in by its promise of enlightenment. 
Language: Feytouched speak the languages of the communities they are raised in. Many, curious about the other side of their nature, learn to speak the languages of both of their ancestries  
Names: Feytouched have names granted to them by their parents, names reflective of their home societies.  Many Feytouched reject these names as the grown into adulthood, choosing names for themselves which they feel more accurately reflect their true natures. The Feytouched of Twilight Vale have taken up the practice of honorifics, granting members of their community special titles in reward for a great deed or service to the community, titles which they may use as part of their name. Citizens of this community have taken up this practice with zeal, and it has grown even further, now often taking the forms of descriptors of a person’s appearance or personality traits. The differences between these types of honorifics are few – both are awarded by popular acclaim
Male Names:		
Smiling Gustav, Miko the Bard, Tal Wyrmslayer
Female Names:		
Danni Fairhaired, Tali Gatewarden, Shyra Longstrider
Adventurers: Rarely at home among other societies, Feytouched are often drawn to a life of adventure, more so in fact than perhaps any other race. Such individuals often find they enjoy life on the open road and in the wild places their travels take them. While they rarely possess the discipline to master any one path, Feytouched are often possess a large number of skills. This, along with their inherent connection with nature makes them ideal traveling companions. 
Feytouched Racial Traits
Ability Score Adjustment: Strength -1, Dexterity +1, Constitution -2, Charisma +2. While weaker and less robust than their Manish kin, the Feytouched have inherited the supernatural allure and grace of the fey. 
Size: Medium. As medium creatures, Feytouched receive no bonuses or penalties due to their size. 
Base Speed: 30 feet. 
Skill Bonuses: Feytouched characters receive a number of racial skill bonuses: 
?	+4 bonus to all checks with the Animal handling skill
?	+2 bonus to all checks with the Craft skill when creating a work of art
?	+1 bonus to all checks with the Sense Motive skill
?	+2 bonus to all checks with the Move Silently and Hide skills in a wilderness setting
?	+2 bonus to all checks with the Survival skill 
?	+1 Bonus to checks with the Listen, Spot, and Search skills
Low Light Vision: Feytouched can see twice as far as Men in low light, starlight, and moonlight.  
Animal Empathy: Normal animals (i.e. non-magical animals) are treated as if they can understand a Feytouched character speaking to them. This gives them the ability to use the diplomacy skill when speaking with normal animals. Use this ability in the same way as a Druid’s Wild Empathy ability, except that non-Druid Feytouched characters do not receive a bonus to this roll based on their level. Feytouched Druids add a +2 bonus to Diplomacy checks under such circumstances. Feytouched also treat the Animal Handling skill as a class skill no matter their character class. 
Enchantment Resistance: Feytouched are immune to magical sleep effects, and receive a +2 bonus against enchantment spells or spell like effects. 
Languages: Manish and Elfish. Feytouched raised in the community of another race grain that language for free as well. 
Favored Class: Witch – A Feytouched character’s levels in the Witch class do not count when determining if they receive an experience point penalty. 

Gnomes
Being both Men and fey at the same time, Gnomes are in many ways a contradiction. The ancestors of Gnomes were originally Men. When Men first came to the shores of Talumh, numbers of them felt a strong connection with the native Tuthá. Instead of rejecting the help offered by the Radiant Court, these Men worked closely with the fey during their settlement of new lands. By giving deference Tuthá traditions and making an effort to work in harmony with nature instead of despoiling and exploiting the lands they settled, these people earned the respect of their fey neighbors. Ostracized by other Men due to their connection with the fey, these people moved deeper into the wilderness, further away from the kinfolk, and closer to the wild places of the world. The close connection they fostered with both the fey and with the land began to affect these Men after a few generations, changing them into something different, something closer to the Tuthá than to their counterparts. Three centuries before the Great War, the leaders of this new folk made a pilgrimage to Trí-na-nóg to humbly offer their allegiance to the Lord and the Lady. In return for this fealty, the great spirits rewarded their new followers with a new name, and with subtle powers befitting their status as fey. They had become the Gnomes. 
Physical Description: Gnomes are smaller and slighter than Men, being on average 3 feet tall, and weighing in at an average of 30 pounds. Gnomes are slight, shapely creatures, and usually retain a slim figure no matter their lifestyle. Their facial and body traits, aside from their slightly pointed ears, are otherwise identical to their Manish ancestors, though of course on a smaller scale. Gnomes mature much more slowly than other Manish races, being fully grown by the end of their third decade. The generally live to be a little over two hundred years old. 
Personality: Gnomes tend to be honest, hardworking, and totally devoted to their families and communities.  They are an intensely curious people, constantly delving into experiments, and experiences in an effort to learn as much as they can about the world around them. This curiosity has led to a remarkable amount of inventiveness, and Gnomes are perhaps the most technologically advanced race in the world. Each Gnome has his or her own ideas however, and the marvelous inventions they create rarely pass outside of a single family group, unless harnessed by their communities. The opposite aspect of this curiosity, a trait which Men often call the “Gnomish Curse”, is their certainty about their knowledge of things. A Gnome that comes to believe something will be absolutely convinced it is true, and only through considerable effort on the part of another will their minds ever be changed. This trait has given rise to the well-known Gnomish love of argument. Gnomes will argue almost any issue relentlessly until one of them finally capitulates. Among other races, such contention would doubtless lead to violence, but Gnomes consider it to be the best way to learn. After all, how could something be true if someone isn’t willing to back it up with a long series of well-reasoned arguments?  In general, Gnomes are inquisitive, gregarious, inventive, rather impulsive, and overwhelmingly fond of pranks and practical jokes. 
Alignment: While they evince traits from across the spectrum, Gnomes overall gravitate toward neutral alignments. At heart a compassionate people, most Gnomes, especially those who adhere to the Radiant Court, tend toward good however. Even the most self-centered among them will often make an effort to help others. Truly evil Gnomes will find themselves ostracized from Gnomish society in general. 
Relations: The Gnomes are recognized by the Lord and the Lady as Tuthá, and even the most anti-human of tribes will not discriminate against Gnomes because of their Manish ancestry. Within Tuthá communities, Gnomes often serve as mediators and diplomats between different races and affiliations, and have an excellent reputation as peacemakers and go-betweens. Men, on the other hand, have a somewhat more nuanced view of Gnomes. Prior to the Great War, many Gnomish communities exist in (somewhat) close proximity to human ones, making these races both neighbors and close cousins. In the past, their close proximity eventually gave rise to a separate race of mixed bloodlines, the Halflings. While no longer in day to day close contact with each other, Men and Gnomes have retained a mutual respect, despite their differences in outlook and affiliation. They get along with other races of Men as well; Halflings, with whom they share a common bloodline, and Dwarfs, with whom they often share a common subterranean home.  Gnomes are the only people universally welcome within Dwarfish lands without special permission. 
Gnomish Lands: Gnomes generally live in their own enclaves within Tuthá communities. Gnomes are a very adaptable people, living both above and below ground with equal ease.  They have a strong affinity with the earth however, and even where they live above ground, they build their homes in burrows in the sides of hills or dug into the earth. Being curious at heart and prone to exploration, Gnomes have settled small communities in other places of the world as well, sometimes on the outskirts of other societies. 
Religion: Gnomes tend to direct their worship toward the Lord or the Lady, depending on which Court they adhere to. Like other aspects of Gnomish life, their views on religion can take on an obsessive significance, largely dependent on their personalities and outlook. Gnomes who take up a religious life do so with as much determination as they do anything else, though those who closely follow a certain deity or path are much less easily swayed from this particular viewpoint, even moreso than their otherwise stubborn counterparts. 
Language: Gnomes speak Gnomish, a dialect of Manish highly modified by their close association with many other races. Most Gnomes learn to speak the common dialect of Manish, along with Elfish, and the languages of their nearby neighbors. 
Names: Gnomes have only one personal name, proposed by their parents at birth and agreed on by the elders of their families. Like everything else in Gnomish society, these names are point of contention, and are often argued about well after the child is born. Gnomish names tend to be unique and inventive, and are most often multi-syllabic or sing-song in nature. They will often use the name of both of their parents as an additional identifier on formal occasions. 
Male Names:		
Aarogan, Kalaman, Methusela, Restwold, Shuvin, Vandemar  
Female Names: 		
Annabetta, Beatrice, Carolena, Gwenivere, Felicity, Wilhelmina
Adventurers: Curious at heart, Gnomes often travel for various reasons. Many find a living as traders, diplomats, messengers, or other go-betweens, traveling between various communities of any sort. They surprisingly often eve find welcome in communities of monstrous races such as Minotuars, Trolls, and other such peoples, though such ventures still retain a significant amount of danger. 
Gnome Racial Traits
Ability Score Adjustment: Constitution -1, Dexterity +2, Strength -2. While quick and agile, Gnomes are less strong and hearty than other races, chiefly due to their small size. 
Size: Small. As small creatures, Gnomes receive a +1 dodge bonus to their AC, and a +1 bonus on all attack rolls. They use smaller weapons than Men, and their carrying capacity is three-quarters of that of a medium sized creature. 
Base Speed: 20 feet
Skill Bonuses: Gnomish characters receive a number of racial skill bonuses: 
?	Gnomes have an inborn connection with the deeper places of the world in which they most often make their homes. This gives them a +2 bonus on all checks with the Move Silently and Hide skills. Increase this bonus to +4 when such checks are performed underground  
?	Gnomes have keen senses, and receive a +2 bonus to checks with the Listen skill, and a +1 bonus with the Spot and Search skills. 
?	Gnomes receive a +2 craft bonus with the Alchemy skill. 
Low Light Vision: Gnomes can see twice as far as Men in low light, starlight, and moonlight.  
AC Bonus: Gnomes receive a +4 dodge bonus to their AC against Huge creatures, or creatures of the Giant subtype such as Trolls or Akki. 
Illusion Affinity: Gnomes have a natural affinity for magic. They receive a +1 save bonus against all arcane spells (e.g. spells that are not elemental or divine in nature). Opponents take a +1 penalty of the DC of all spells cast by a Gnome. 
Spell-Like Abilities: As fey creatures, Gnomes are endowed with natural magic powers and can produce a variety of spell like effects. Gnome characters can use each of the following spells 1/day: Dancing Lights, Ghost Sound, and Prestidigitation. Treat these abilities as spells cast by a 1st level caster with a save DC of 10 + the Gnome’s Charisma modifier. 
Animal Empathy: Burrowing mammals are treated as if they can understand a Gnome character speaking to them. This gives Gnomes the ability to use the diplomacy skill when speaking with such creatures. Use this ability in the same way as a Druid’s Wild Empathy ability, except that non-Druid Gnomes characters do not receive a bonus to this roll based on their level. Gnome Druids add a +2 bonus to Diplomacy checks under such circumstances. 
Languages: Manish and Gnomish. Many Gnomes who live near or as part of Tuthá communities also learn to speak Elfish. 
Favored Class: Sorcerer – A Gnome’s levels in the Sorcerer class do not count when determining if they receive an experience point penalty. 

 
The Tuthá 
The Tuthá are original inhabitants of Talumh. Produced by the powers invoked during the creation of this world, the Tuthá have an in-born magic as well as a strong connection with the natural world.  In many ways, the Tuthá and the land are one. Empowered further by the connection with the Lord and the Lady, these beings exist in harmony with the world around them. 
Tuthá Communities
Tuthá communities are welcoming to any individual regardless of race. Fey of any tribe can be found in the largest towns and the smallest villages among them. Even Manish races are welcome within these settlements, though Men are rarely found among the Tuthá due to their history of mutual antagonism. 
While they do build and create as other races do, the structures and places that make up a Tuthá community are designed to harmonize with and compliment their natural environments. Tuthá workmanship is uniformly splendid, and even the simplest forms they create are constructed to form a pleasing and artistic shape. Magic is also incorporated into many structures, so that they often seem to be of one form from one angle, and another when viewed from elsewhere. These constructions and effects are often designed with concealment in mind, and a Tuthá settlement, no matter where it is, can be next to impossible for outsiders to stumble on.  

Tribes of the Tuthá
There are seven major racial divisions of the Tuthá peoples, called Tribes by them. These Tribes exist physically as separate races with their own forms and varying degrees and types of magical ability. While tribal lines exist as a physical division between them, the communities that the Tuthá form most often include members of many different tribes.   
Brownies 
The smallest of the fey, Brownies are one of the most populous of the Tuthá tribes. Brownies are tiny, even in relation to other fey, growing to no more than a foot in height and weighing less than 10 pounds. Brownies live quick, short lives that are nonetheless full of activity. While they only live to be 20 years old on average, this short lifespan is mitigated by having little need for sleep. On average, a Brownie will need only as much sleep in a week as a Man would need in a day. 
The physical nature of an individual Brownie is dependent on its affiliation. Those who follow the Radiant Court are called true Brownies. They have a pale skin tone, lean bodies, hyperactive personalities, and a tendency to be optimistic. Those who follow the Glimmering Court, referred to as Gremlins, have a greenish or bluish skin tone, bloated bodies, and tend to be sour, crude, and somewhat lazy. Should a Brownie change their adherence to another Court, their bodies gradually begin to change to reflect their new affiliation. Brownies of both types evince exaggerated features such as large eyes, broad feet, bushy eyebrows, spindly limbs, and over-long, pointed ears.
Brownies of all types tend to focus on a specific craft or type of task the way Gnomes or Dwarfs do, their specializations often becoming frantic obsessions. They are also quick to give up on a project, or start a new one whenever the mood catches them. Brownies are also great collectors of things. Any item which they think has the potential to be of any value to themselves or someone they know. This makes their tiny homes into places filled with junk and half completed things. 
Short lived creatures, Brownies talk, think, and move fast. They can be incredibly hard to understand in whatever language they’re speaking, require those they are talking to pay careful attention to their speech. 
Faeries 
Faeries, or true fey, are one of the most populous of the Tutha tribes. Faeries are small, slender humanoids with sharply pointed ears, slanted eyes, and long, slender limbs. On average they stand 2 ½ feet tall, and weigh roughly 35 lbs. or so. Faeries possess two pairs of gossamer wings which they can use to fly for short distances. Their wings are rounded and slightly insectoid in appearance, and are covered in downy hairs similar to those found on a moth. Faerie wings are highly magical in nature and can be made to appear and disappear at will. 
Faeries are whimsical and playful creatures, highly curious in nature, and extremely fond of playing pranks on others with the aid of their magic. These pranks are rarely harmful in nature, but most often feature some sort of embarrassment on the part of their target. Like other fey, they are fond of music, art, and are especially famous for their wild gatherings featuring poetry, comedy, tests of skill, and large amounts of wine. Faeries also imbibe a special liquor made by them called wirod. Wirod functions as much of a drug as a liquor to Manish creatures, and has a powerful giddying effect. It has the same effect as wine on fey creatures. 
Faeries have a mixed relationship with Men, and seem to especially enjoy playing pranks on them. They are also well known for testing the character or particular Men with challenges such as riddles, tests of wits, and other such tricks. Those who take these pranks and challenges with good grace are often rewarded by Faeries with a gift or magical boon of some sort. Those who take poorly to them find themselves targets of a Faerie’s ire. Faeries of the Glimmering Court are particularly merciless in taunting and harassing those who have offended them, a task which to them becomes their most important mission. Faeries are particularly susceptible to flattery however, and the easiest way to get back on their good side is through praise and gifts.  
Faeries typically live around 200 years or so. These creature mature slowly, reaching adult size around their 50th year. While they can be killed like any other mortal beings, Faeries rarely die of natural causes. At the end of their natural live span, they can choose instead to discorporate, freeing their spirits to bond with their environment. In this way, they continue to exist in the places they love in spirit form. 
Faeries exist in both male and female genders, though males are extremely rare, being only around 20% of the population. To counteract this, Faeries may bond with many other types of creature to reproduce. If a female faerie bonds with another type of Tuthá, there is an equal chance a Faerie child or a child of the other fey race will be produced. Male Faeries bonding with a Tuthá always produces another Faerie. Bonding with Men is something Faeries do rarely. Such pairings on behalf of a female Faerie has an equal chance to produce another Faerie or a Feytouched human. When a male Faerie partners with a female human, a Feytouched is always produced. 
Faeries typically exist as a large portion of most Tuthá communities and act in a wide variety of roles and professions. Their extremely whimsical and flighty nature typically makes them poor leaders however as they are rarely able to maintain any sort of seriousness. Faeries are make excellent artisans and craftsmen, though they most often work on a number of projects instead of concentrating on a single creation.  




The Races of Man
Dwarfs
Men
Halflings

The Tuthá
Brownies / Gremlins
Dryads
Elfs
Faeries / Sylphs
Gnomes 
Nymphs
Pixies / Nixies
Satyrs / Fauns / Phookas
Sprites 
Spriggans

Denizens
Akki (Ogre Mage)
Boggin (peat bog faeries) 
Bugbear
Centaur
Daemon
Doppelgänger
Goblins
Hags
Harpies
Imp
Kappa (water demon)
Kenku
Kobold
Lycanthrope

Merfolk
Minotaur
Siren
Treant
Tengu
Trolls (Ogre)
Vampire

Creatures and Monsters
Banshee
Barghest
Basalinsk 
Catoblepas
Cockatrice
Chimera
Dragons
Ettercap
Griffin
Hatae (Dog-Lion) 
Hippogriff
Hydra
Ki-rin
Kitsune 
Manticora
Naga (good)
Owlbear
Pegasai 
Phoenix
Umber Hulk
Unicorns
Will ‘o Wisp
Warg
Wyvern



Character Classes
Many character classes found in the D&D 3.5 Player’s Handbook and other supplements can be used in Talumh campaign, though almost all of them undergo a certain amount of modification. These changes to the base classes along with several new classes are outlined in this section. As in all cases, these modifications may be used, changed further, or discarded entirely based on the needs of your gaming group. The final word rests with the DM.  
Disallowed Classes
A number of character classes are not a good fit for this campaign world. Outlined below are character classes that should not be used in a Talumh campaign, along with rationale as to why. 
Paladin:	The Great Spirits, the deities which oversee Talumh, do not take a more subtle approach when interacting with the world than in other realms. Thus, they have no need for militant orders of holy knights who to carry out their orders. When necessary, they choose a champion in the form of the Favored Soul class in lieu of a Paladin. 
Psionics:	Creatures native to Talumh are magical in nature, and do not develop psionic abilities. Men did not enjoy these powers naturally prior to their arrival on Talumh, nor have they developed them during their time on this world. 
Wizard: 	The Wizard class is replaced by the Magician class in a Talumh campaign. While similar in many respects, the ways in which these classes prepare and cast spells differ from each other on a fundamental level. 

Standard Classes
The character classes listed here may be used in a Talumh campaign unmodified from their original form as found in the 3.5 Edition Player’s Handbook and other works.
Barbarian 
Barbarians in Talumh generally fall into two categories – outsiders and exiles from civilized places who have chosen to live in the wilds but lack or have refused a magical connection with nature that other character classes like Druids and Rangers enjoy, and warriors from tribes of Wild Men and other creatures who exist in pockets throughout the world.   Whatever their stripe, the general mechanics of the class remain unchanged. 
Races: Given their drive and shifting natures, Men are most likely to become barbarians. Feytouched or Dwarfish barbarians are very rare, though the partially fey natures of these peoples may sometimes lead them to walk down the wild path followed by these wilderness warriors.  Gnomish and Halfling barbarians are practically unheard of. 
Fighter
Fighters find many places in the world of Talumh. By and large, well trained warriors serve as members of guard or militia forces for the various states and petty kingdoms spread across the continent. Many fighters seek out a life of adventure, serving as soldiers for hire or wandering mercenaries. Martial knowledge is also passed down throughout families. Many sons and daughters of the nobility of all societies are taught a fighter’s skills as a part of their upbringing. 
Races: Fighters are found among every race of Talumh. Fey races are somewhat less likely to take up this path than Manish ones however.
Druid
In a world filled with vast tracts of wilderness, it should come as no surprise that Druids are more common on Talumh than in many other realms. The majority of Druids are members of the Greensingers, an order dedicated to the preservation of the natural world. Some Druids refuse to join this group however, practicing their arts on their own. This reluctance can sometimes lead to conflict between these hermits and the more traditional Greensingers. Both groups of Druids work closely with other dwellers in the wilderness such as Rangers and Barbarians, as the goals of these characters are often similar. 
Races: Druids are most often Men, though Feytouched, Gnomes, and Halflings are occasionally drawn to this path. Dwarfish Druids are practically unheard of. While the Tuthá races live in harmony, they rarely worship it directly as the Druids do.  
Monk
Monks do exist on Talumh, but are somewhat rare. Only one actual order exists which trains initiates in the mental and physical disciplines that give monks their mystical powers: the Shining Path. Rarer still, the occasional hermit or ascetic will also arrive at the state of body and mind to join the ranks of the monks on their own. 
Races: While open to peoples of any race, the Monks of the Shining Path generally hail from the ranks of Men.  The occasional Dwarf of Gnome is drawn to this path as well. 
Ranger
Rangers exist wherever civilized lands border the wilds. These wilderness warriors often work hand in hand with Barbarians, Scouts, and others to protect the wild places of the world, and the people that venture into them. While the goals of the Greensigers are different from those of the independent minded Rangers, both often work together for mutual benefit. Rangers find respect among communities of almost any type, even the Tuthá, whom they often encounter in their travels.  
Races: Rangers may be of any race, though they are most commonly Men. Feytouched and Halfling Rangers are not uncommon, as both these peoples have a deep connection with the natural world. Gnomish Rangers are less frequently seen, though not unheard of. The occasion Dwarf with a penchant for exploration in the deeper dark places of the world can be found among the ranks of Rangers. 
Rogue
Wherever there groups of people congregate into settlements, there you will find the Rouge playing his or her trade.  A nuanced class of people, Rouges run the gamut from bold highwaymen, to common thieves, to trill-seeking treasure hunters, to noble minded agents clandestinely serving a higher calling from the shadows. 
Races: Rouges are equally likely to be of any race, and are found among communities of any size and type. Human bandits, Feytouched second-story men, Gnomish tricksters, Halfling traders, and Dwarfish gamblers all bear the hallmarks of this class. 
Scout 
(Note: This class can be found in the Complete Adventurer supplement) On the frontiers of civilized lands wherever people must content with the trackless wilderness you will find the scout.  Combining the martial skill of the Fighter with the stealth of the Rouge along with the camouflage and nature skills of the Ranger, Scouts are the skillful eyes and ears of their companions. This skillful hunters and trackers find an easy home in the open wilds of Talumh, where their many abilities often come in hand. 
Race: Scouts can be from any racial background. Feytouched, Gnomes, and Halflings, being partially fey in nature, make the best Scouts due to their natural stealthiest and innate connection with nature. Men and Dwarfs can make excellent Scouts as well, and Dwarf Scouts in particular excel at stealth in underground places. 
Sorcerer
Sorcerers of Talumh channel their magical power not from their bloodline, but from the magical essences inherent in the land itself, and from the energies of their souls. Sorcerous magic comes naturally to many races of this world, and every person born here has the ability to master it with study and practice. 
Races: Sorcerers tend to be of fey or fey-influenced races.  The vast majority of Manish communities consider sorcery to be unnatural, and the more superstitious openly persecute its practitioners. Gnomes and Feytouched openly embrace this practice. Halflings, being somewhat distrustful of magic in general, tend to shy away from sorcery, though they have not proscribed it the way Men have. Dwarfs tend to shy away from it as well as they consider this type of magic too chaotic. 


Warlock
(Note: This class can be found in the Complete Arcane supplement) Warlock magic in Talumh is an outgrowth of the practice of sorcery, whose powers are drawn from the natural magical essence of its creatures (see Chapter 3). Warlocks are those who learn to channel this type of magic into the eldritch blasts and invocations that are the hallmarks of this class. 
Races: Those races with fey ancestry are the most likely to become Warlocks. Dwarfs in particular favor this type of magic over traditional sorcery, though the Feytouched, especially those raised in Tuthá communities, known to commonly use it as well. Halflings and Gnomes are easily able to master this craft, though they typically prefer to study sorcery instead (in the case of Gnomes), or avoid magic in general (in the case of Halflings). Human Warlocks are very rare, but not unheard of, especially among those Men with a trace of fey ancestry. 

Modified Classes 
These character classes have been slightly or significantly modified for play in a Talumh campaign. While they have retained in essence their original form, many have undergone some extensive changes to reflect the unique nature of this world.  
Bard
Among both the Tuthá and the Manish races, story and song have long held a central place in the lives of all folk. While artists of many stripes ply and practice their trade in communities of any size, they lack the divine inspiration to become true Bards. Bards in Talumh draw their mystical abilities from a divine source, and thus they magic they preform and the spells they are able to learn are divine in nature (see chapter 3 for a more thorough explanation of magic in Talumh). There are few actual churches on the world of Talumh, and the role of seeing to the day-to-day religious needs of the people is chiefly taken up by the Bard. 
Bards serve their divine patrons as an informal class of ministers who interact with their communities at large through song, story, and other types of performance. In addition to keeping the folk traditions of their people alive, Bards also serve the faithful as intermediaries, counselors, and practitioners of folk medicine. They can be found in all walks of life and in any type of communal setting. It is just as common to find a Bard at a ramshackle inn in the remotest Halfling village as it is to find one in the council chamber of the Gloaming Halls. 
The Bard class is modified in the following ways for play in a Talumh campaign: 
Affiliation: A Bard must choose a religious affiliation during character creation. Each affiliation draws it divine energy from a particular spiritual source. A few sample affiliations are outlined below, though a player and DM can certainly work together to create another appropriate affiliation of their own. More information on religious practices among the people of Talumh can be found in chapter 4. A Bard’s alignment must be within at least one step of their affiliations – for example, a Bard following a Lawful Neutral affiliation may only be Lawful Good, Lawful Neutral, Neutral, or Lawful Evil in alignment. Should this character’s alignment shift outside of these bounds, they lose their access to the Bardic Music ability, and any spellcasting abilities based on the Bard class. These penalties last until such time as they return to an acceptable alignment, and are the recipient of an atonement spell cast by a Bard, Cleric, or Favored Soul of equal or higher level.  
The Path of Light: Alignment: Neutral Good. The bearers of Manish folk religion, Bards have long held a central place in human spiritual life. While in some communities this path is being slowly eclipsed by the Path of Man, Bards may nonetheless still find welcome wherever they travel among Men. It is considered good luck to provide a Bard with food and shelter, hospitality which the Bard is expected to return with his or her skills.  Bards who follow this path often find as much welcome in many Gnomish and Halfling communities as they do in Manish ones. 
The Radiant Court: Alignment: Chaotic Good. Bards of many Tuthá races serve the Lady in much the same fashion as their Manish counterparts. Tuthá Bards of the Radiant Court are particularly well known for their humor, magical abilities, and showy performances. During her yearly great feast, Bards of all sorts gather wherever the court is held to compete for the honor of serving as the Queen’s court Bard for the year. 
The Glimmering Court: Alignment: Chaotic Neutral. Bards of the Glimmering Court carry a somewhat sinister reputation. They are known for their incredible skill at trickery, their gluttony, and their susceptibility to flattery.  Sometimes whimsical, often frivolous, and above all unpredictable, the Bards who serve the Lord are never to be taken lightly. 
Spells: Bards retain the spell progression of the standard base class. Bards in Talumh practice a divine form of magic as opposed to an arcane one however. Refer to chapter 5 for a list of spells available to Bards. 
Skills: Talumh Bards retain all the class skills of the base class, with the following exceptions: Escape Artist is replaced with Heal (Wis); Move Silently is replaced with Handle Animal (Cha); and Disguise is replaced with Use Rope (Dex). 
Races: Bards hail from almost any race, though their race most often determines their religious affiliation, with rare exceptions. Human Bards almost always follow the Path of Light. Feytouched Bards are as likely to follow this path as either of the Tuthá Courts. The same can be said of Halflings or Gnomes, though Bards of these races are significantly less common. Dwarfish Bards are rare in the extreme as Dwarfs of a religious bent usually serve the Lord as Clerics (see below). 
Cleric
The world of Talumh is not a place of highly organized religions – most people follow traditional folk beliefs and practice them the same way as most other members of this communities. This is not to say that organized religion does not exist here. Wherever large groups of people gather together to form towns and cities, religious institutions develop as a matter of course. These independent temples and churches are quite as often at odds with each other over matters of doctrine and belief, and in major cities different organizations following the same religious path practice their faith in startlingly different ways.  The exception to this religious chaos, at least among human communities, is the Church Ascendant. Talumh’s newest religious sect, the Church has grown significantly in size and influence, especially in some of the larger human communities. Over the last several decades, it has absorbed the majority of the smaller organizations following the Path of Man. 
Many of these more organized religions train their followers to be priests, holy men, soothsayers, and other such spiritualists. Those with the inner strength and wisdom to do so are often trained to be Clerics. Unlike other types of divine spellcasters on Talumh such as Bards, Favored Souls, or even Druids, Clerics are made, not chosen, learning the art of calling on the divine powers of their patrons through devotion and prayer. 
Clerics of Talumh receive the standard package of abilities outlined in the base class from the 3.5 edition player’s handbook. Many affiliations (see below) modify these abilities in a number of ways however.
Granted Powers: Clerics of Talumh do not receive the granted powers associated with the domains they cast spells from. Rather, they receive a special granted power based on their affiliation (see below).   
Spellcasting: Clerics in a Talumh campaign cast spells as defined by their base character class. See chapter six for an outline of how magic use in Talumh differs from other worlds. 
Turning Undead: A Talumh Cleric’s ability to turn undead is also governed by their affiliation (see below).  
Affiliation: In a similar fashion to a Bard, a Cleric must choose a religious affiliation during character creation. A Cleric’s alignment must be within at least one step of their affiliations – for example, a Cleric following a Lawful Neutral affiliation may only be Lawful Good, Lawful Neutral, Neutral, or Lawful Evil in alignment. Should this character’s alignment shift outside of these bounds, they lose their access to any of the supernatural abilities granted by their affiliation such as the ability to turn undead or cast divine spells. These penalties last until such time as they return to an acceptable alignment, and are the recipient of an atonement spell cast by a Bard, Cleric, or Favored Soul of equal or higher level.  
A few sample affiliations are outlined below, though a player and DM can certainly work together to create another appropriate affiliation of their own. More specific information on each of these affiliations can be found in chapter 4.

The Temple of the Dawn
Path: The Path of Light
Alignment: Lawful Good
Domains: Good, Sun
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Clerics of the Temple of the Dawn are proficient with two simple weapons of their choice and light armor, but not shields. They are also proficient with the Flamberge, a special type of two-handed sword, the chosen weapon of their order. See chapter five for statistics on this weapon.   
Granted Powers: Clerics of the Temple of the Dawn receive two additional granted powers:
?	Spontaneously cast Light a number of times per day equal to their Cleric level /2 (minimum of 1)
?	+2 bonus on saves against damage caused by magical or mundane fire, and against any damage caused by exposure to extremely hot temperatures. 

The Underchurch 
Path: The Lord
Alignment: Lawful Neutral 
Domains: Law, Earth
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Clerics of the Underchurch receive the same proficiencies as a standard cleric.  In addition, they receive a bonus proficiency in Battleaxe and Warhammer, the preferred weapons of their order. 
Turning: Clerics of the Underchurch rebuke undead instead of turning them, and may choose to either rebuke or destroy undead creatures as a greater turning. 

The Church Ascendant 
Path: The Path of Man
Alignment: Lawful Neutral 
Domains: Knowledge, Strength 
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Clerics of the Church Ascendant are proficient with all simple weapons and light and medium armor, but not shields. They are also proficient with the Longsword, the chosen weapon of their order. 
Turning: Clerics of the Church Ascendant do have the ability to turn undead.
Spontaneous Casting: Clerics of the Church Ascendant do not have the spontaneous casting ability.   
Granted Power: Clerics of the Church Ascendant have a powerful Lawful aura, granting them a +1 bonus to all attack and damage rolls against Chaotic creatures. This bonus increases by an additional +1 at level 5, and every 5th level beyond (e.g. +3 at 10th level, +4 at 15th level, etc.). This bonus also applies to spell damage against Chaotic targets, which take a penalty equal to the attack bonuses outlined above on all saving throws against this Cleric’s spells.  

The Mendicant Brothers 
Path: The Path of Light
Alignment: Neutral Good 
Domains: Healing, Protection, Travel
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: The Mendicant Brothers are only proficient with the Quarterstaff. They are not proficient with any type of armor.  
Granted Power: Mendicant Brothers may cast an additional spell from the Healing domain once per day at the highest spell level they are currently able to cast. Treat this as a spontaneous casting which does not impact any other granted daily spell allotments.  

The Revelation 
Path: The Path of Man
Alignment: Neutral Evil
Domains: Destruction 
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Clerics of the Revelation are proficient with simple weapons, light and medium armor, and shields. The favored weapon of this order is the Morningstar. 
Turning: Clerics of the Revelation do not have the ability to turn undead.   
Granted Power: In lieu of a second domain, Clerics of the Revelation may instead use arcane magic in the same fashion as a Magician (see the Magician class below), choosing one lesser rune to specialize in. Whenever they would normally gain access to a domain spell, they may instead select a spell of equal level from this rune’s spell list.  Casting these spells counts toward their usual spells per day based on their level as a Cleric. 
Races: Clerics can be of any race, but are chiefly found among Men and Dwarfs. Halflings, lacking the interest and zeal for many religious paths rarely become true Clerics, instead becoming Bards. Gnomes occasionally take up this class, though less often than Men or Dwarfs.  Feytouched and other fey races almost never become Clerics, choosing instead to worship and serve in their own ways. 
Favored Soul
(This class can be found in the Complete Divine supplement) There are many followers of the religious paths of Talumh. Most are worshipers who take the tenants of these paths who follow the teachings of their temples and churches with as much zeal or indifference as their desires call for. Some few join a religious order and devote their lives to serving their chosen path. Fewer still fully immerse themselves in lives of study and prayer, becoming Clerics who serve as the leaders and soldiers of their churches. There is a step of religious devotion even beyond this however. Some unique individuals are not called to religious service, they are chosen for it. These are the Favored Souls. 
Favored Souls are extremely few in number. Every generation of Men sees but a handful of these extraordinary individuals. They come from all walks of life, and can be of any race. The reasons these people are chosen by their divine patrons are rarely revealed to them directly, even when their purpose is complete, but none can deny that each has an important destiny to play in the unfolding tapestry of this world. 
The Favored Soul class has been modified in the following ways for play in a Talumh campaign: 
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Favored Souls are proficient with two simple weapons of their choice and light armor. They are also proficient with the favored weapon of their patron (see below). 
Wings: Favored Souls of Talumh do not manifest wings as the standard base class. This ability is replaced by granted powers. 
Patron: A Favored Soul chooses a divine patron during character creation. They must also choose the same alignment as their patron. Like Clerics and Bards, should they ever deviate from this alignment, they immediately lose their spellcasting abilities and granted powers. These can only be restored when the character returns to their patron’s alignment, and they complete a special quest given to them by their patron. See chapter 4 for more information on different patrons. 

The Lord
Alignment: Chaotic Neutral
Favored Weapon: Shortspear 
Domains: Luck, Trickery
Granted Powers: 
?	5th Level – Become Invisible at will (as the spell) 1/day. Increase the uses per day by 1 for every 5 additional levels. 
?	10th Level – Confusion 1/day
?	15th Level – Shadow Walk 1/day

The Lady
Alignment: Chaotic Good
Favored Weapon: Shortbow
Domains: Chaos, Magic
Granted Powers: 
?	5th Level – Charm Person 1/day as a caster of the same level. Increase the uses per day of this ability to 2/day at 10th level
?	10th Level – Summon Nature’s Ally 1/day. Treat this as a spell cast at half the character’s level in this class. 
?	15th Level – Teleport 1/day. This may be used against an unwilling creature as a touch attack. An unwilling recipient gets a Will save against such an attempt vs. a DC of 10 + the Favored Soul’s level in this class. 

The Creator (The Path of Light)
Alignment: Neutral Good
Favored Weapon: Club
Domains: Creation, Good
Granted Powers: 
?	5th Level – Turn Undead as a Cleric of the same level 2/day 
?	10th Level – Hold Monster 1/day
?	15th Level – Banishment 1/day 

The Virtues (The Path of Man)
Alignment: Lawful Neutral
Favored Weapon: Longsword
Domains: Strength, Pact
Granted Powers: 
?	5th Level – Heroism 2/day
?	10th Level – Wall of Force 1/day 
?	15th Level – Quest 1/week
Races: As the selection of Favored Souls by their divine patron is for their own purposes, characters of this class can be of any race.  

New Classes
These character classes are new to the game, introduced to reflect the unique cosmology and nature of Talumh. While some of these classes retain a similarity to those introduced in the 3.5 Edition core books and other materials, others have been newly created for play in a Talumh campaign. 
Magician
Long ago, before the Great War, the Shadow Lords sought to empower Men with magical energies similar to those of the Tuthá races. While these experiments failed, through them a way was found to instead allow Men to empower themselves, and thus become more useful pawns for these vengeful spirits. Through a series of invocations and rituals, they taught these Men to call on the infinite possibilities of the Void and shape them into their heart’s desires. The practitioners of this art became the first Magicians. 
Magicians practice magic, but in a way vastly different than all other magic users of Talumh. Their magic is not inherent to themselves or to the world in which they live, rather it is drawn for outside the Veil to bring the powers of creation to bear. In the cosmology of this world, this type of magic can be described as unnatural. Through it however, tis practitioners can attain heights of power undreamed of by other magic users. 
Adventurers: Magicians adventure to test their abilities against the world. Though the frequent use of their magic they learn to better channel the powers they call upon, and thus attain a better mastery of their craft. Some travel on errands for their schools or individual masters. Others are on a quest for wealth or personal power. 
Characteristics: Magicians possess a wealth of magical powers to call upon, increasing as they grow in power and experience. While their powers are limited by their knowledge of the ancient runes that give them form and by their own mastery of their craft, a skilled Magician can support their companions in a number of ways left up to only their imagination.  This versatility and flexibility in creating magical effects is the hallmark of a true Magician. What they gain in magical force however, they lack in physical power. Hours of studying and obsessing over magical diagrams as well as the toll spellcasting takes on their bodies make Magicians weak and frail.
Alignment: Magicians may be of any alignment. While they tend toward lawful alignments due to the highly structured nature of their arts, personal attitudes and beliefs do not influence a person’s ability to call forth magic.  
Religion: The powers summoned by Magicians are in many ways antithetical to the great spirits that rule Talumh. This presents a problem for many of those who follow a religious path. For those who follow the Path of Man however, there is no conflict between the powers of the Magician and their belief in the Virtues of humanity. This path developed in many ways as an outgrowth of the Magician’s art – those who adhere to this it see their powers as a mastery of the cosmos and something that serves as a forge to refine their souls. While in general the spirits of Talumh revile the powers of the Magician, the Lord turns a blind eye toward his followers who practice these arts, seeing them as a means to an end. 
Background: Magicians are drawn to their arts for various region. For some, it runs in the family. These are trained by one or both of their parents to master the runes and rituals that power this art. Others seek out this path on their own, drawn to the personal power it allows access to, or as an exit from a life of poverty. These seek entry at a school of magic or tutelage as an apprentice under a skilled practitioner. The arts of the magician take many years to master even their most basic tenants however, and most start on this path at a very young age. 
Races: Magicians hail primarily from the race of Men, the people who first learned to master this art from the Shadow Lords. Dwarfs know of this type of magic as well, though practitioners among this race are far less common. Dwarfs typically use this art in the creation of magical items, weapons and armors in particular. Few if any of the other races, especially among the Tuthá tribes, practice this type of magic, as it is considered by them antithetical to their very beings.  
Other Classes: Learning to become a Magician takes a toil, not only on the body and mind, but also on connections a Mage has with others in his or her life. Mages are often isolated from those around them and as a rule consider themselves superior to most other beings by dint of the incredible powers at their command. This makes most view Magicians as arrogant, and even the best among them can be more than a little condescending. Nonetheless, they make an excellent addition to any adventuring group. 
Role: A Magician’s primary role in a part is similar to that of a Wizard in other campaigns – to remain in the back of the party and support the rest of the group with their powerful magics. Magicians can be much more versatile than other types of spellcasters however, especially as they increase in level. Their skills are constantly tested as they cast their spells however – any mistake can quickly turn a Magician from an asset into a liability. 
Abilities: Intelligence is the most important ability for Magicians as it determines what type of spells they have access to, and the number of spells they may cast each day. 
Hit Die: d4
Class Skills: A Magician’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill are: Appraise (Int); Concentration (Con); Decipher Script (Int); Intimidate (Cha); Knowledge [any] (Int); Speak Language (n/a); and Spellcraft (Int). 
?	Skills points at 1st level: 2 + Int. modifier x4
?	Skills points at each level: 2 + Int. modifier
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Magicians are proficient with one simple weapon of their choice. Armor physically interferes with many of the intricate movements they must use as part of their magical rituals. Magicians are thus not proficient in the use of armor, and incur an armor check penalty to the Spellcraft check they must make when casting their spells – refer to chapter six for information on these penalties. 
Spells: Magicians cast their spells using a ritual composed of several distinct parts. The keystone to these rituals are a number of combined geometric and verbal structures called runes. There are thirty two known runes used by Magicians, twenty lesser and twelve greater. Each rune takes a significant amount of study and experimentation to master, and a given Magician can only comprehend a number of these runes based on their own skill with magic. By combining a rune with other verbal, material, and somatic component structures, the application of the rune’s power is modified, resulting in a spell. Both the component structures of these spells and the runes themselves are intricately complex in nature. They require constant practice to maintain mastery of them. The execution of a given spell must also be performed in an exact manner. Any variation or mistake results not only in failure of the spell, but also a painful backblast against the Magician themselves which can extreme pain, injury, or in some cases even death.  Magicians understand a number of runes and cast a number of spells per day based on their level in this class as found on the tables in chapter six. Also outlined there is the number of spells that a Magician may retain in their memory at any given time (see below). Magicians with a high Intelligence score receive a number of bonus spells per day and runes known based on their ability bonus. 
In order to cast a given spell, a Magician must have an Intelligence score equal to 10, plus the spell’s level. For example, in order to cast 3rd level spells, a character must have an Intelligence score of 13 or higher. 
Spellbook: There is no limit to the number of spells a Magician may know – this is based only on the number of runes they have access to. Once a Magician learns a new rune, he or she can determine the types of spell effects they can generate using this run after a period of study.  Magicians are able to retain a certain number of spells structures they know in their memories, allowing them to carry these spells with them indefinitely and call up the effects of these spells whenever they will. As with other attributes of this class, this ability improves as the Magician gains experience.  Magicians do carry a book, scrollcase, or other object with runic diagrams, notes on spells, and other such miscellanea which serves as their spellbook. They do not need to study these spellbooks every day to renew their spells. Rather, they hold a number of spells in their minds and use them at will. A Magician needs only a full night’s rest to restore their regular allotment of spells they can cast in a given day. When they wish to change the spells they have held in their memories, this is where their spellbooks come into play. During a day of uninterrupted study and meditation, a Mage may change the spells he or she carries in their memory, up to the maximum allowed by their level in this class. If this period of study is interrupted, they must begin again. During this period they will still have access to the spells they had formerly memorized. 
Inscribe Rune: A Magician receives the Inscribe Rune feat as a bonus feat at first level. See chapter five for a full description of this feat.
Bonus Feats: At 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th level a Magician receives a bonus feat. These bonus feats may be used to purchase a metamagic feat, an item creation feat, or a spell mastery. 
  
Summoner
Talumh is a world alive with magic. Some practitioners make their powers themselves, either drawing it from beyond the Void, or from their own spiritual essences. Others drawn it from a spiritual source such as a divine patron or even the land itself. Then there are those who practice the rarest and most unusual form of magic – magic drawn from the life-forces of the spirits who gave themselves up to make this world a permanent reality. These are the Summoners. 
Summoners are those who have joined with these life-forces, forming a pact that allows them to call on the power of these spirits, and though which these eldritch forms can make their will known in the world they sacrificed their lives to shape. 
Adventurers: Unwelcome or misunderstood in most civilized societies, almost all Summoners take to a life on the road as a matter of course. Their endless quest to bond with new spirits, to carry out the will of those they have aligned themselves with, and to understand these beings make Summoners adventurers and explorers as a matter of course. Many of the spirits they interact with coalesce their physical manifestations in places far remote from any settled land. It is these places and rumors of them that the Summoner is constantly seeking.  
Characteristics: Summoners possess a wealth a spiritual insight into the nature of the world, surpassing that of even the most wise sage or devout cleric.  In addition to their spiritual power, Summoners must learn a number of other skills by necessity, including the Diplomacy needed to interact with and make pacts with spirits, survival skills to allow them to travel the wilds, and a host of knowledge and crafting skills to be self-sufficient. While their many skills often come in handy, it is the incredible powers of their bonded spirits they can bring to bear which makes a Summoner a boon to any group. 
Alignment: Summoners tend strongly toward neutral alignments. Those who have too strong a view toward evil or good, or especially toward law or chaos often have a hard time striking a bargain with spirits strongly aligned in another direction. Characters of this class have no true restriction when it comes to alignment however, and some actively seek out only those spirits who mesh best with their own viewpoints. 
Religion: Few if any Summoners are beholden to a specific religious path. Most religious paths take a dim view of Summoners, seeing their powers as antithetical to the natural order of Talumh. Some, including those beholden to the Path of Man, actively oppose them or seek their destruction. The Tuthá are generally neutral toward Summoners and the beings they call on, though those who adhere to the Lord and his court are often more welcoming of them. The Greensingers are the only sect that fully support Summoners and their craft, support which many Summoners return in kind. 
Background: Summoners have an almost mythical reputation among the cultures of Talumh – many believe that their powers don’t exist or ascribe alternative explanations to them.  This makes summoning a poorly understood and misunderstood art, and a path that few are drawn to on their own. Many Summoners learn their craft from a relative or other close mentor who has chosen to pass on their knowledge. Some few, having independently learned about the ability to bond with these spirits, seek out them out on their own. The rarest type of Summoner is one who experiences a personal encounter with these spirits, learning of their power by accident. 
Races: Summoners can come from any race. While they are slightly more common among Men due to their higher numbers, members of other Mannish or Tuthá races are just as likely to learn these powers as any. 
Other Classes: Due to their wide number of skills, powerful support abilities, and general utility, Summoners tend to get along very well with most other classes. Other magic users such as Magicians, Sorcerers, and Druids, find them an excellent complement to their own abilities, and more physical characters like Fighters and Barbarians enjoy the wide ranging support they can provide. Clerics, especially from more hierarchical and orthodox denominations, are often troubled by Summoners however, and may even persecute them depending on the tenants of their order.  
Role: Summoners have a versatile role within an adventuring party. The role of each individual Summoner is often defined by powers access through the spirits they bond with. Each spirit offers them access to a small list of abilities which can do anything from deal damage or add penalties to opponents, provide support or healing to allies, and many other such useful actions. These character otherwise play a supporting role to combat, and assist a party with their variety of skills. 
Abilities: Wisdom and Charisma are the most import abilities for Summoners. Wisdom governs the potency of the abilities a Summoner may call on from their bonded spirits. Charisma assists them in communicating with spirits, and governs their success in the process of bonding. 
Hit Die: d6
Class Skills: A Summoner’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill are:  Bluff (Cha), Concentration (Wis), Craft [any 1 craft skill] (Int), Decipher Script (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Knowledge [any] (Int), Profession Wis), Sense Motive (Wis), Spot (Wis), and Survival (Wis)
?	Skills points at 1st level: 4 + Int. modifier x4
?	Skills points at each level: 4 + Int. modifier
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Summoners are proficient with a choice of either 3 simple weapons, or 1 martial weapon. They do not start with a proficiency in armor or shields. Light armor does not interfere with the rituals they use to summon spirits, but medium or heavy armor does (see below).   
Spirit Pact: One of the fundamental abilities of a Summoner is their ability to make pacts with the spirits of Talumh. The knowledge of these pacts doesn’t come naturally or easily, and can only be mastered by those who have an open spirit. When a pact is made, a small shard of the spirit’s essence permanently joins with the Summoner’s soul. Though this joining, the Summoner gains access to the spirit’s abilities and can all on them for aid. A Summoner can make pacts with multiple spirits, the total number of which is governed by their level in this class. Summoners begin with one spirit bonded to them during character creation. In addition to the powers that a spirit allows a Summoner to call up, each spirit also has a passive ability associated with it. These passive effects are always active unless the Summoner suppresses them, or voluntarily breaks a pact. Chapter six contains a full outline of the process of making a pact. 
Summon Spirit: Summoners may call upon the powers of the spirits bound to them to aid them both on and off the battlefield. Each spirit has five distinct abilities, which a Summoner gains access to as they increase in level. The number of times a Summoner may access these powers on a daily basis is governed the same way a Magician, Cleric, Bard, or other magic user access their powers (see the table below). While a given Summoner may have multiple spirits bound to them, they may only call on the power of the spirit they have actively manifested. Refer to chapter six for an outline of how a Summoner manifests a particular spirit, and how they call upon a spirit’s powers. 

Witch 
Since their arrival on Talumh, Men have been at odds with this world. From its native peoples who they have constantly warred with, to the unnatural magics they conjure, to the very great spirits that rule over them, humanity’s relationships with this world have been ones of constant contention. Some few among them have rejected this state of conflict for reasons as varied as there are individuals. Some of these were the ancestors of the Gnomes, who joined with the fey to become a Tuthá race of their own. Some find a path to power by drawing on the energies of the land itself, becoming Sorcerers or Summoners. Others do not choose one of these paths – instead they are chosen. Marked at their birth by a special destiny, these few Men have a pact to serve the great spirits that rule Talumh, and through them serve the world itself. They are the Witches. 
Adventurers: Witches adventure by both choice and need. Unwelcome in most human communities and openly persecuted in many, they are often forced to live nomadic lives by necessity. Witches form small circles of practitioners called Covens that act as a mutually supporting society where they may learn from each other and refine their arts. Covens often exist within communities of any size, though they most often practice their arts under a cloak of secrecy and attempt to avoid undue attention. Many Witches are sent on errands by their Covens to further its goals and the goals of their divine patrons. The Lord and the Lady, the great spirits whom Witches call upon for their power, also call upon individual Witches or groups of them to carry out quests on their behalf. These quests themselves often form the basis of many an adventure. 
Characteristics: Witches possess a number of powers unavailable to other characters, and in generally very skilled and well-rounded in their own right. Learning to defend themselves by necessity, Witches are trained in a number of basic martial skills, making them decent combatants. Their limited spell casting abilities including access to healing abilities allows them to provide a range of support to their companions. 
Alignment: Beholden to the divine caretakers of Talumh, and in many ways to the world itself, all Witches possess some of its ever changing nature. Witches are never of a Lawful alignment, but may choose any other. They typically tend toward the chaotic and neutral ends of the spectrum. 
Religion: Witches disavow any particular religious path, choosing instead to worship the Lord and the Lady, the beings from whom they receive their powers, jointly. This belief makes them heretical to Men, who for the most part view these great spirits as evil entities. It also sets them outside the world view of the Tuthá, who venerate one of these beings in particular and consider the viewpoint of the Witches to be inconstant with the cosmology of Talumh. 
Background: The blessing (or curse, as some would have it) of Witchcraft is often passed down through family lines. When its powers begin to make themselves known, usually early in childhood, a family member will begin a neophyte’s instruction. A potential Witch without a family member to instruct them will often have a senior practitioner seek them out to serve as a mentor, often at the behest of the great spirits. The powers of a Witchcraft are difficult to hide and their pull nearly impossible to ignore, though some spend much of their lives trying. Witches who do not learn to control their gift often become a scourge to their communities, and in many lands they are subject to a variety of punishments including confinement, exile, or even execution. 
Races: Witches are typically of Mannish stock. Men and Feytouched Men are the most likely to be chosen for this gift. Only in the rarest cases will members of another race be granted the powers of Witchcraft, a fact which confuses many among both Men and the Tuthá. 
Other Classes: Consistent with their nature, Witches tend to get along well with members of other free spirited classes. Barbarians, Rouges, and arcane magic users make good counterparts to Witches, as they often feel like outcasts from civilized society. Characters of a spiritual bent such as Clerics and Bard also tend to get on well with Witches as they share a source of divine inspiration. Monks and Favored Souls on the other hand do not as Witches often view the former as too serious, and the latter as pretenders. The best pairing for a Witch however is a Summoner. Both of these characters are true outsiders, and both look to the great spirits for their source of power. 
Role: Their broad range of skills and abilities along with their overall flexibility make Witches an excellent supporting character in any group. While they lack the hit points, damage potential, and finesse of a Barbarian or Fighter, Witches can nonetheless hold their own in a combat situation. Their limited access to spells lessens their utility as magic users, though their other spell like abilities more than make up for this deficiency. Witches can also learn to create a limited number of magic items, further adding to their utility. 
Abilities: Wisdom is the most important ability to a Witch. This ability governs the number of spells a Witch may know, the potency of these spells, and their number of bonus spells (if any). Physical abilities, Strength and Constitution in particular, are also very important to a Witch. High scores in these abilities increase a Witch’s combat abilities and their ability to survive in a fight. 
Hit Die: d8 
Class Skills: A Witch’s class skills (and the key ability for each skill are:  Craft [any 2] (Int), Decipher Script (Int), Disguise (Cha), Intimidate (Cha), Knowledge [any 3] (Int), Perform (Cha), Profession (Wis), Sense Motive (Wis), Spellcraft (Int), and Use Magic Device (Cha). 
?	Skills points at 1st level: 3 + Int. modifier x4
?	Skills points at each level: 3 + Int. modifier
Weapon and Armor Proficiencies: Witches are proficient with all simple weapons and an additional martial weapon of their choice. They are not proficient with any type of shields or armor.  Wearing any sort of armor interferes with a Witch’s ability to cast spells, and they receive the called for spell check penalty when wearing armor or carrying a shield. 
Dream Quest: Their powers are nothing short of miraculous, but also come at a steep price. Being granted the favor of the Lord and the Lady endows a Witch with many mystical abilities, but in return these great spirits often call on them to perform tasks for them. The reasoning behind these tasks is rarely revealed to the individual who caries them out. Nonetheless, these quests play an important part in the evolving tapestry that is the world of Talumh. 
Each time a character gains a level in this class – after 1st level for starting characters, or at 1st level for multi-class characters – the Lord and Lady visit them in a dream to outline a task that must be completed. These dreams are highly symbolic in and often precognitive in nature, frequently revealing their meanings as signs and omens from the dreams are experienced in real life. If a Witch continues to experience difficulty interpreting the meaning of a dream, their patrons will send them more signs, or even another dream to help them along the way. 
Once a Witch has discovered the meaning of this dream, they must quest of behalf of the Lord and the Lady to complete it to the best of their ability. A character may not advance in level in this class until they have started down the path of the goal outlined by such a quest. Willfully abandoning a quest causes a Witch to lose access to any of the special abilities of this class, including their ability to cast spells, until they are the recipient of an Atonement spell cast by a Witch of equal or greater level. Once the Atonement has been successfully concluded, the Witch must then continue to complete the quest that they dropped. 
This restriction does not necessarily mean a Witch must cast aside all other matters and concentrate solely on their quest however. They may continue to complete existing adventures or see to other matters as their situation dictates. The Lord and the Lady are often patient when it comes to accomplishing their goals, and give their followers a certain amount of leeway when it comes to carrying them out. If a Witch dallies too long however, the spirits will revisit them with the dream two more times. If the Witch does not pick up their quest within 1 week of receiving the third dream, they are considered to have abandoned their quest and suffer the penalties outlined above. 
Character may advance in class level during the pursuit of an active quest. In cases where this happens, the character will receive another quest within 1d3 weeks of the conclusion of their active quest. 
Invoke Power: Starting at 1st level, A Witch may call upon the Lord and Lady for a small portion of their power to produce a minor spell like effect. This ability has a number of uses (as outlined below), and may be used a number of times per day equal to one half of the Witch’s class level (minimum of 1). Treat all the uses of this ability as divine spell like abilities cast by a cleric of one half of the Witch’s class level for the purposes of overcoming resistance, duration, and other such mechanics. The uses of this power include:
?	Heal or Harm – Deals 1d6 damage or heals an equal number of hit points, +1 per class level divided by 2. Treat this ability as a touch attack when used to deal damage. 
?	Bless or Bane   
?	Light or Darkness 
?	Read Magic 
?	Purify Food and Drink
Spell Resistance: As they expand in power and knowledge, Witches begin to take on some of the divine essence of their patrons. Starting at 5th level, A Witch gains a +1 bonus to all saving throws vs. spells and spell like effects. This bonus increases to +2 at 10th level, +3 at 15th, and +4 at 20th level. 
Ritual Magic: Witches may call upon greater manifestations of the power of the Lord and the Lady through the use of a series of rituals. While this power represents a type of divine spellcasting, the scope of its effects can be significantly expanded by the number of participants in the ritual. Ritual magic has five levels called circles. As a Witch expands in power through their increased connection with their divine patrons, they gain the ability to understand more complex rituals, thus gaining access to higher circles. These rituals take a significant amount of time in the casting however, and thus witches are only limited by the availability of time and components they need to enact them instead of the number of times per day they may use them. The effects generated by this type of magic along with the mechanics for its use are further outlined in chapter six.  
The World of Talumh

Talumh exists as a large island continent adrift in a trackless ocean, beyond which lies an infinite and impenetrable mist. At its widest point, this continent stretches over 2,000 miles across from the White Shores in the west to the Great Marsh in the east. At its longest, it reaches just over 1,800 miles from the tropical jungles of the Knife atop the great southern peninsula, to the shining northern mountains of the Pale, locked in an endless winter. Throughout these lands, travelers and denizens alike will find every manner of terrain and climate, along with a host of creatures and peoples both magical and mundane. Talumh is a wild place, abounding in natural beauty, with many places untouched and unspoiled by the works of its many peoples. 

Cosmology
Talumh exists within a hidden pocket on the material plane. As the great force of the One that saw its creation took a different path than most other guardian deities, the physical existence of Talumh’s plane has been somewhat precarious throughout known time. The essence of this physical reality, manifested first by the great spirits to create their own realm, and then later to create this one, was drawn from the Dream of the One – its infinite spiritual wanderings throughout the other planes of the multiverse. Thus, the physical reality of this plane and its associated world-continent are very different than other places in the multiverse.  
Reality in Talumh 
The laws of physics on Talumh are similar to most other places in the material plane. Gravity, for example, operates in much the same way – when something goes up, it must also come down. When the physical world was created however, it was done so in a way that was quite remarkable, giving Talumh some special properties all its own. During the creation of this world, its creators, the great spirits, gave up their life forces to fuel their creation, fusing them with pure elemental essences to give the world shape and form. Thus, elemental powers have a much stronger effect on the reality of this world. This has also made magic in Talumh vastly different than in other places. The world itself is alive with living magical energies, power which can be tapped by those who know how to call it. 
Elemental Powers
Fires seem to burn brighter and with a purer radiance, flickering and dancing of their own accord. The air seems to be animated by a spirit all its own, which speaks softly to those who stop to listen to its voice. The earth itself seems to be alive in the voices of trees whispering to each other in the dark of a primeval forest, or the in the mournful, subsonic groans of ancient mountains. Even the water has voice and anima, softly clinging to the skin perhaps a second too long.  
Of course, these phenomena are simply parts of everyday life to the creatures and peoples who call Talumh home – beings who have no basis for comparison. Ancient writings handed down from the beginnings of Men in this world tell the tale of these differences more fully however. These people reacted to these changes which they perceived in reality with great wonder, and with great thanks to their creator, they gave the name Talumh to the world they had been brought to, a name which means “blessed realm” in the Old Tongue. 
Magic in Talumh 
The world of Talumh is a place shaped and sustained by great magical energies. Beings to this world are themselves formed and given life by these primordial powers, making all its creatures magical by their very natures. The Tuthá are the prime example of magical beings – they have been part of Talumh since its beginnings, and (for the most part) live and exist harmoniously with the natural balance of the world. Other beings such as Gnomes, Halflings, and Dwarfs, have been endowed with magical natures through their choice to connect with the world. While these people are not as close to the land as the true fey are, they nonetheless have become empowered by the connection with this world as they have embraced the powers that rule and sustain it. Men, on the other hand, continue to exist as outsiders. The refusal of Men to abide by the natural orders of the world marks them as vastly different to the other civilized races of Talumh. This difference is clearly evinced by the inability of most Men to draw on the natural magic of the world, a process as simple to the fey races as the drawing of breath. 
There are four types of magic which can be channeled by the creatures of Talumh: Sorcery, which is the drawing on of the natural magical energies of the world; Elemental Magic, which is draws on the primordial natural forces of the world, or the beings that gave it form; Void Magic, which calls up the infinite magical force of the Void; and Divine Magic, which is granted as a boon by the followers of the Lord, the Lady, or the other factions of great spirits in exile beyond the void. These various types of magic are outlined below. 
Sorcery
The practice of sorcery is as old as the world of Talumh, and was in essence born with it. The first sentient creatures to walk this world, the ancestors of those who would go on to become the Tuthá of today, learned early on to call upon the magic in their very souls to create effects which changed the world around them. In a very real way, the creators of this world allowed the process of creation to continue through this gift to their children. 
Sorcery in Talumh is practiced in a way almost identical to how it is performed in many other realms – the Sorcerer learns, by practice or by instruction, a set of rituals which are intended to provoke a magical effect, and then after uses these patterns to spontaneously generate their magic. 
All Tuthá by their very nature are sorcerers, and each member of a particular tribe can be counted on to know a spell or two. Members of the Tuthá races excel at sorcery, and with study and practice, which their ever capricious natures sometimes allow, Tuthá can become practitioners of incredible power. Elfs in particular have proven to be the most adept at this type of magical practice, and with their nearly endless lifetimes these beings can learn to channel energies that nearly rival the great spirits in power. Other related races closely related to the natural world, Gnomes, Dwarfs, and Halflings in particular, can also learn this art. Their more mundane natures and Manish bloodlines make sorcery come somewhat less naturally to them however, though they can become as powerful as any Tuthá given aptitude and study. 
While it does not come naturally to them, some Men have learned to take up this type of magic. While this type of magic is not “in the blood” of Men as it is in other races, they can learn to harness its power given a number of factors. For the most part, these practitioners are those who live in communities more in harmony with the natural world. This close proximity to the wilder places of Talumh gives some rare Men insight into its innate magical powers, which they too can learn to shape. Some rare Men who prove their worth have sorcery taught to them by other Mannish races, or even in the rarest of cases the Tuthá themselves. This practice is then taught to others in these communities who show a knack for it.  The vast majority of human communities, on the other hand, consider sorcery to be an essentially evil practice, and will persecute its practitioners. This makes human sorcerers rare in all but the most remote or tolerant of their lands.  

Elemental Magic
Elemental Magic draws on the forces similar to those called upon in the practice of sorcery. The powers that fuel this type of magic are of a much more wild and primordial bent however. Elemental magic is used primarily by two groups of practitioners: Folk who live among the wildest places of Talumh and have come to embrace the raw power of nature; and those who have made pacts with the life forces of the great spirits, still bound to the land they sacrificed themselves to create.  
Some rare individuals, by and large those of Manish races, have given up the trappings of civilized life to live among the wild places of the world. While many of those who flee their communities for the wilds meet a lonely end or eventually return to their homes, some thrive among the wild places and learn to live in harmony with them. Fewer still among these find the spiritual insight to draw upon the primordial elemental magic of the world, becoming practitioners of the art of elemental magic. Greensingers (druids), are the prime example of such folk. Those who have awoken this gift are sought out by this mysterious order. They are tried and tested by the Greensingers, and those who survive and are found worthy are inducted into their mysterious ranks. 
Just as rare as these druids are others who come upon the gifts of elemental magic in a similar way, but choose to walk a different path. These people, Men chiefly, go by many names – ranger, scout, guide, beastmaster, whatever they are called, these folk work to protect both the natural world, and the peoples that exist alongside it. While their magic does not manifest as strongly and outwardly as that of the Greensingers, these folk nonetheless have gained an indelible connection to the natural world, and especially with the creatures that exist within it. 
The most uncommon practitioners of this rarest form of magic are called Summoners. These individuals, which can hail from almost any of Talumh’s races (except Dwarfs, mysteriously), have made pacts with the primordial spirits of Talumh and learned to manifest their elemental natures. While Summoners are not magical practitioners on their own per se, their ability to harness the energy of these spirits can give them access to magnitudes more magical power than a single sorcerer or magician could ever dream up. Harnessing such power by its very nature is incredibly dangerous, and the spirits themselves must be approached cautiously. They will only willingly give their power to those whom they deem worthy, and Summoners who anger them can find their source of power quickly dry up. 
Void Magic 
Void Magic is a form of magic that draws on the Void that is the Dream, the essence of the One, the elder deity of Talumh.  Void Magic exists as series of rituals created by the Shadow Lords and gifted to Men. These rituals channel the infinite possibilities of the Dream to bring forth magical effects. Unlike sorcery which is spontaneous and shaped by the desires and nature of its users, void magic is rigid, austere, and unbending. Its forms must be followed perfectly and exactly – even the slightest mistake leads to failure of the spell being attempted, and sometimes agony or even death for its user.  The forms, rituals, runes, invocations, and gestures which make up the practice of this art must be learned by rote and unending practice. There is only so much magic that can be stored in the mind however, a reality which puts strict limits on the practitioners of this form.  
Those who practice this art generally refer to themselves as Magicians. Void magic is practiced almost exclusively by Men. It is taught by both formal colleges and by individual practitioners who tutor their own apprentices. Some Dwarfs, creatures who make poor sorcerers at best, have taken up this practice as well. Among Dwarfish practitioners it is chiefly used for the empowerment of magical items, especially weapons and armor, an art form at which it excels. 
Divine Magic
Divine magic is in essence magical power which is drawn on from an otherworldly source.  This power differs in a number of fundamental ways from other forms of magic, chiefly that it relies not on the motivations, learning, or even actions of individuals; rather it is a boon granted directly from the great spirits themselves. By and large the practitioners of this type of magic are priests, mystical, clerics, and other holy people devoted to a particular spirit or a particular group of spirits. The Lord and Lady also empower a selected group of special chosen practitioners with their powers through a series of rituals called witchcraft.
There are many religious paths walked by the peoples of Talumh. The Tutha courts worship the Lord or the Lady directly. The Chosen, a number of them anointed directly by these great spirits serve their communities as spiritual advisors and intermediaries. Some few of these Chosen, marked even serve these great spirits directly, and are the only being permitted within the sacred precincts of their magical floating city. 
Men have formed spiritual bonds of their own with the great spirits. Chief among these is the Path of Light, an unstructured belief system worshiping one divine creator and calling on a system of human folk beliefs stretching back to long before their arrival on Talumh. Seeking to harness the ambition and drive of Men for their own end, the Exiles have co-opted this religious practice for their own ends, and supply its wise women, spirit doctors, and other holy people with their divine power.  A more recent cult practice has risen up among other human communities over the last few centuries. Called the Path of Man, this group is highly hierarchical in nature, and holds the ascendancy of Man above the other races as one of its central tenants. While its roots lie in Man’s defeat in the Great War, this belief system is in fact inspired by the Shadow Lords, the spirits which have granted it access to divine power. 
A third and final group of Manish religions exists with access to divine magic, a group very unlike the others. This group, called the Shining Path, is devoted to the quest of each individual for personal enlightenment. Not sponsored by any spiritual agency, the monastic followers of this practice have instead learned to channel the energy of their own spirits into divine magic like effects through the mastery of their minds and bodies. 
Perhaps the most outlandish practitioners of divine magic however are called witches. These individuals are marked by the Lord and the Lady as having a special destiny to play in the world of Talumh. Unlike other users of divine magic, Witches are empowered by these great spirits irrespective of race.  Becoming a Witch is done by choice of the individual alone by making a personal covenant with the Lord and the Lady. Witchcraft does not draw directly on their power like other forms of divine magic however – instead, this practice is empowered by them through a series of rituals which define its effects. In many ways, witchcraft binds elements of all the types of magic into one. Its practitioners are almost universally persecuted however, and only among some Tuthá or the most welcoming of Manish societies will Witches find welcome. 
Geography
The world-continent of Talumh is a remarkably varied land, home to a wide variety of climates, terrain types, and geographical features. While the geography of this land follows what could be for the most part called normal patterns, its inherently magical nature gives it a number of variances and quirks all its own. Like other parts of the makeup of Talumh, its geography tends toward the extreme. Its mountains are high, its plains vast, and its canyons deep beyond measure. For every mundane, if exaggerated locale one finds, there is an otherworldly or magical place, the crystalline forest east of the Arcadian Mountains or the upwards flowing Lilac Falls being good examples. Adding to this is the sheer wildness of the landscape – much of Talumh remains uninhabited and unexplored, leaving this a world of natural wonders, many of which have never been seen by Men or fey. 
Talumh’s climate generally follows some of the predictable patterns of other worlds. In the north, the climate is cold with long hard winters and short, wet summers. In the south, it is hot and wet throughout most of the year, with a short, extremely mild winter leading up to seasonal floods. This is where the similarity ends however. Many regions have vastly different climates than you would expect to find, or even odd seasonal patterns. The perfectly timed seasons of the sacred valley or the chaotic, lighting infused sandstorms of the Dune Sea being good examples. Overall, the weather of Talumh tends to be wondrous, picturesque, and often extreme. 
The continent of Talumh is divided into six distinct geographic regions, outlined in this section. They are: The Expanse, making up the vast western reaches of the continent; The Pale, consisting of the northern reaches of the continent; Wilderland, the region of mountains and valleys in the center of Talumh; The Long Coast, consisting of the southern coastal plain and an archipelago of scattered islands in the Singing Sea; The Sward, the rough eastern wilderness; and The Sword, the great southeastern peninsula. 

The Expanse
The Expanse is the second largest geographic region of Talumh, only slightly smaller than the Wilderland, which makes up the bulk of the central part of the continent.  Home to two large human communities as well as settlements of many other folk, it is also the most heavily peopled. The Yashim Mountains, making up the southeastern border of the Expanse are also home to the majority of Talumh’s Dwarfs. While more settled than the other reaches of the continent, the Expanse nonetheless retains much of its essential wildness. Wild tribes of creatures both indifferent and hostile toward the more settled peoples roam these wild places, finding homes among its vast plains, towering mountains, and rugged hills. 
The Expanse is one of the lease heavily forested regions of Talumh. The lack of one of their favorite haunts along with the large numbers of Men and other beings makes this region one of the least populated by the Tuthá.  Wilder types of fey have taken up residence in these lands in their stead. 
The Expanse is made up of several sub-regions, outlined below: 
The White Plains
Cape Hope
The Kala Hill Country
The Redfirs 
The Blue Mountains
The Twelve Sisters
The Tall Cedars
Tel Donna Wetlands
Primori Sound
Genta Uplands
The Yashim Mountains
Pirate Coast

The Pale
Darkwood
Twilight Vale
The White Mountains
Spring Valley
Dantalia Fjords
Kransa Highlands
Highmoors
The Shining Plain
The Thundering Coast
The Great Ice

Wilderland
Kendlewood
Golden Mountains
Lithlewood
Cuennan Valley Country 
Goodlund
The Badlands
Heavenly Mountains
The Rift
Sacred Valley
The Mirror Sea
Clarion Canyon

The Long Coast
Selkawood
The Grand Strand
Kesla Grasslands
Tanis High Country 
The Withered Heath
Shugra Marshlands
The Delta
Kolia Archipelago

The Sward
The Dune Sea
The Veldt
The Greensward
The Crystal Forest 
The Great Swamp
Tower Hills
Coastlund 

The Knife
The Mountains of the Sun 
The Empty Quarter	
The Chula Jungle
The Serpent’s Spine
The Bleak Coast
The Maw

Magic of Talumh 
Void Magic
Void Magic is the process of drawing forth power from the infinite possibilities of the Dream that is the Void through the use of magical rituals. This type of magic is the sole province of Magicians, the philosophical descendants of those Men to whom the necessary rituals were first taught by the mysterious Shadow Lords. While these beings sought to bind the practitioners of this magic to them by this gift and use them for their own ends, ever adaptable and ambitious Men have broken these bonds and now use this power freely.  
Void Magic allows a Magician access to a nearly limitless wellspring of power. The amount of this power that an individual can draw is limited by their experience in doing so however, and only with many years of constant practice and study does a Magician enhance their abilities to their full potential. Void Magic is also extremely difficult in execution. The runes and other ritualistic components that call up its power and highly exacting – one small mistake can have dire consequences for the Magician. 
Retaining Spells
Unlike traditional Wizards of other worlds, they do need to study their spellbook every day in order to renew the spells they have memorized. Though the mastery of runes and other attendant rituals which they have practiced all their lives, they already have the ability to call forth their spells to mind whenever they are needed. The number of spells they may hold in memory is instead governed by their overall magical ability, represented by their class level. To commit spells to memory, or to change the spells they are keeping in their minds, a Magician must spend 24 hours of uninterrupted study and meditation. After this period has successfully elapsed, the new spells take the place of the old. Any interruption during this period foils the process, which must be attempted again.   
A Magician may retain a number of spells based on their class level and Intelligence bonus. Magicians also receive a bonus number of maximum memorized spells based on their Intelligence. Consult the tables below to determine how many spells a Magician may hold in their memory at any given time. 

Table 6.1 – Number of Magician Memorized Spells
Level	Max # of Spells	Level	Max # of Spells	Level	Max # of Spells	Level	Max # of Spells	
1	3	6	7	11	10	16	13	
2	4	7	8	12	11	17	13	
3	4	8	9	13	11	18	14	
4	5	9	9	14	12	19	14	
5	6	10	10	15	12	20	15	

Table 6.2 – Bonus Spells per Day 
Intelligence Bonus	Bonus Spells  / Day	
+1	0	
+2	1	
+3	2	
+4	2	
+5	3	
+6 or More	3, +1 additional spell per +1 bonus	

Casting Spells
Each time a Magician casts a spell, they must recite and draw the runic structure that forms its base, and use a number of additional verbal and somatic rituals to modify its power to produce the spell’s effects. The fashion in which this is done is extremely exacting – any small mistake in the ritual can prove disastrous for the Magician. 
Each time a spell is cast, the character makes a check using the Spellcraft skill against a DC based on the level of the spell. Consult the table below to determine the DC of this check. 
Table 6.3 – Spellcasting Check DCs
Spell Level	Spellcraft CD	Spell Level	Spellcraft DC	
0	5	5	20	
1	10	6	22	
2	12	7	25	
3	15	8	28	
4	18	9	30	

Spell Failure 
When a Magician fails their Spellcraft check during the casting of a spell, there can be a number of negative effects, based on how badly the check was failed. The first effect is that the spell is immediately lost, counting against the number of spells per day the Magician may cast. The table below lists a number of additional possible effects, based on the roll the character made as part of their Spellcraft check.  

Table 6.4 – Spell Failure Effects
Points Check Failed By	Effects	
1-4	Spell is lost, but no additional effects	
5-9	Make a Fortitude save against the original Spellcraft DC. Success means no additional effects, failure means the Magician is stunned for 1 round	
10-14	Make a Fortitude save against the original Spellcraft DC. Success means the Magician is stunned for one round, failure means the character is stunned for 1d4 rounds. 	
15-19	Make a Fortitude save against the original Spellcraft DC. Success means the Magician is stunned for 1d4 rounds, failure means the character is receives 1d4 points of damage, +1 damage per the level of the spell. 	
20 or more	Make a Fortitude save against the original Spellcraft DC. Success means the character is receives 1d4 points of damage, +1 damage per the level of the spell. Failure means the character is immediately reduced to 0 hit points. 	

Side Effects of Spellcasting
Calling forth the runes that cast a spell also have some strong physical effects during the casting. The words used to draw fourth the spell taken on a booming resonance. The lines that the Magician traces in the air to make the runes call fourth radiant lines of power that hang in the air while the spell is being cast. This makes it practically impossible to hide Void Magic in the process of being used. It can also be extremely intimidating for the targets of a Magician’s spells. Weaker willed creatures (less than 2 levels or hit dice) must make a Will save against DC 10 whenever they witness a Magician casting a spell. Failure makes them flee in fear for 1d4 rounds. Success means they are shaken for 1 round. This save is only made once per encounter. 
Runes
The most basic component of Void Magic is a number of rituals which combine both geometric shapes and verbalizations called runes. There are thirty two runes understood and utilized by Magicians. Twenty of these are called lesser runes, and twelve are called greater runes. A Magician can master a certain number of runes based on their skill with magic. Consult the table below to determine how many runes your character may know, based on their class level. Magicians with a high Intelligence may know additional runes based on their bonus in this ability. 

Table 6.5 – Maximum Number of Runes Known
Level	Max # of Runes Known (greater/ lesser)	Level	Max # of Runes Known (greater/ lesser)	Level	Max # of Runes Known (greater/ lesser)	Level	Max # of Runes Known (greater/ lesser)	
1	1/1	6	2/3	11	4/5	16	4/9	
2	1/2	7	2/4	12	4/6	17	5/9	
3	1/3	8	3/4	13	4/7	18	5/10	
4	1/3	9	3/5	14	4/8	19	5/10	
5	2/3	10	4/5	15	4/9	20	6/10	

Table 6.6 – Bonus Runes Known 
Intelligence Bonus	Bonus Runes Known (Greater / Lesser)	
+1	0/1	
+2	1/1	
+3	1/2	
+4	1/3	
+5	2/3	
+6 or More	3/4	

Mastering a New Rune
A character of this class begins the game with their maximum number of known runes as outlined above. This Magician will likewise have access to all the spells directly associated with this rune (see below). 
As they advance in level, they gain the opportunity to master new runes. These runes can be gleaned from a variety of sources. Firstly, they can have it transmitted to them by another Magician. This option is most often available for those who have studied under another Magician or as a part of a formal college. These secrets are closely guarded however, and even with close contacts in the magical community there is often a price associated with transmitting them. 
However a Magician comes across a new rune, they must carefully study and experiment with it before using it to cast new spells.  One week worth of uninterrupted study is required before the rune can be understood. The more runes a character knows, the more difficult the process becomes to master a new one. Once this time period has elapsed, make a Spellcraft check against a DC equal to 15, plus the total number of runes the character has already mastered. If this check fails, the character has not been able to master the run fully, and must start the process all over again. 
The Runes
Below are listed the known runes of Void Magic. There are a total number of xx runes known and understood by the Magicians of Talumh. There are two types of runes: Lesser runes and greater runes. The major difference between these rune types is the number of spells they allow access to. 
Greater Runes: 	Air, Arcana* Calling, Compulsion, Correspondence, Delusion, Enervation, Fear, Flame, Making, Radiance, Resistance, Transformation, Warding, Veiling

Lesser Runes:  	Anima, Bewilderment, Cognition,  Concealment, Corrosion, Creation, Death, Debilitation, Detection, Dynamism, Earth, Empowerment, Energy, Force, Frost, Glamour, Lightning, Location, Lore, Perception, Phasing, Restoration, Scrying, Shadow, Shielding, Slumber, Summoning, Teleportation, Vitality, Water
* All Magicians have access to the Arcana rune starting at 1st level. Possession of this rune does not count toward the total number of runes known. 




Rune	Spell Level	Spell(s)	Components	
Air	0	Feather Fall		
Air	1	Jump		
Air	2	Gust of Wind		
Air	2	Wind Wall		
Air	3	Fly		
Air	4	Air Walk		
Air	4	Control Weather		
Air	5	Control Winds		
Air	5	Overland Flight		
Air	6	Wind Walk		
Air	7	Control Weather		
Anima	2	False Life		
Anima	3	Vampiric Touch		
Anima	5	Magic Jar		
Anima	8	Trap the Soul		
Anima	9	Energy Drain		
Bewilderment	0	Dancing Lights		
Bewilderment	1	Hypnotism		
Bewilderment	2	Hypnotic Pattern		
Bewilderment	3	Tasha’s Hideous Laughter		
Bewilderment	4	Confusion		
Bewilderment	5	Mind Fog		
Calling	1	Summon Monster I		
Calling	2	Summon Monster II		
Calling	3	Summon Monster III		
Calling	4	Summon Monster IV		
Calling	5	Contact Other Plane		
Calling	5	Summon Monster V		
Calling	6	Summon Monster VI		
Calling	7	Summon Monster VII		
Calling	8	Summon Monster VIII		
Calling	9	Summon Monster IX		
Cognition	0	Message		
Cognition	1	Speak with Animals		
Cognition	2	Detect Thoughts		
Cognition	3	Tongues 		
Cognition	4	Sending		
Cognition	5	Rary’s Telepathic Bond		
Compulsion	1	Command		
Compulsion	2	Calm Emotions		
Compulsion	3	Hold Person		
Compulsion	3	Suggestion		
Compulsion	4	Geas		
Compulsion	5	Command, Greater		
Compulsion	6	Quest		
Compulsion	7	Hold Person, Mass 		
Compulsion	8	Antipathy / Sympathy		
Compulsion	9	Dominate Monster		
Concealment	1	Sanctuary 		
Concealment	2	Invisibility		
Concealment	3	Invisibility Sphere		
Concealment	4	Invisibility, Greater		
Concealment	6	Mislead		
Correspondence	1	Longstrider		
Correspondence	3	Blink		
Correspondence 	3	Leomund’s Tiny Hut		
Correspondence	4	Dimensional Anchor		
Correspondence 	4	Leomund’s Secure Shelter		
Correspondence	5	Leomund’s Secret Chest		
Correspondence	7	Drawmij’s Instant Summons		
Correspondence 	7	Mordenkainen’s Magnificent Masion		
Correspondence 	7	Refuge		
Correspondence 	9	Gate		
Corrosion	0	Acid Splash		
Corrosion	2	Melf’s Acid Arrow		
Corrosion	4	Rusting Grasp		
Corrosion	5	Cloudkill		
Corrosion	6	Disintegrate		
Corrosion	8	Incendiary Cloud		
Creation	3	Minor Creation		
Creation	4	Fabricate		
Creation	5	Major Creation		
Creation	6	Wall of Iron / Wall of Stone		
Creation	7	Simulacrum		
Death	3	Speak with Dead		
Death	5	Slay		
Death	6	Circle of Death		
Death	7	Finger of Death		
Death	9	Power Word – Kill 		
Debilitation 	0	Touch of Fatigue		
Debilitation	2	Blindness / Deafness		
Debilitation	3	Poison		
Debilitation	5	Symbol of Pain		
Debilitation 	7	Power Word – Blind 		
Debilitation	8	Horrid Wilting		
Delusion	1	Disguise Self		
Delusion	1	Silent Image		
Delusion	2	Minor Image		
Delusion	3	Major Image		
Delusion	4	Hallucinatory Terrain		
Delusion	5	Mirage Arcana		
Delusion	5	Persistent Image		
Delusion	6	Permanent Image		
Delusion	6	Programmed Image		
Delusion	7	Project Image		
Detection	0	Detect Secret Doors		
Detection	1	Detect Animals and Plants		
Detection	2	See Invisibility		
Detection	3	Detect Alignment		
Detection	4	Detect Scrying		
Detection	6	True Sight		
Dynamism	1	Animate Rope		
Dynamism	2	Rope Trick		
Dynamism 	4	Freedom of Movement		
Dynamism	6	Animate Objects		
Dynamism 	9	Time Stop		
Earth	3	Stone Shape		
Earth	5	Transmute Mud to Rock / Rock to Mud		
Earth	6	Move Earth		
Earth	7	Statue		
Earth	8	Earthquake		
Empowerment	1	Magic Weapon		
Empowerment	2	Align Weapon		
Empowerment 	3	Keen Edge		
Empowerment	4	Magic Weapon (greater)		
Empowerment	6	Heroism, Greater		
Energy	1	Magic Missile		
Energy	2	Remove Paralysis		
Energy	3	Haste		
Energy	7	Mordenkainen’s Sword		
Energy	9	Mordenkainen’s Disjunction		
Enervation	0	Inflict Minor Wounds		
Enervation	1	Doom		
Enervation	1	Inflict Light Wounds		
Enervation	2	Inflict Moderate Wounds		
Enervation	3	Inflict Serious Wounds		
Enervation	3	Slow		
Enervation	4	Crushing Despair		
Enervation	4	Enervation		
Enervation	5	Inflict Critical Wounds		
Enervation	6	Harm		
Enervation	8	Power Word – Stun 		
Fear	1	Cause Fear		
Fear	2	Scare		
Fear	4	Fear		
Fear	4	Phantasmal Killer		
Fear	5	Nightmare		
Fear	6	Eyebite		
Fear	6	Symbol of Fear		
Fear	7	Insanity		
Fear	8	Maze		
Fear	8	Symbol of Insanity		
Flame	0	Flare		
Flame	1	Burning Hands		
Flame	1	Continual Flame		
Flame	2	Heat Metal		
Flame	2	Scorching Ray		
Flame	3	Fireball		
Flame	4	Fire Shield		
Flame	5	Wall of Fire		
Flame	7	Delayed Blast Fireball		
Flame	8	Firestorm		
Flame	9	Meteor Swarm		
Force	0	Mage Hand		
Force	0	Open / Close		
Force 	1	Hold Portal		
Force 	2	Knock		
Force	4	Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere		
Force	5	Wall of Force		
Force	7	Forcecage		
Frost	0	Ray of Frost		
Frost	1	Chill Touch		
Frost	2	Chill Metal		
Frost	4	Wall of Ice		
Frost	5	Cone of Cold		
Frost	8	Polar Ray		
Glamour 	1	Charm Person		
Glamour	2	Misdirection		
Glamour	4	Charm Monster		
Glamour	5	Feeblemind		
Glamour	8	Charm Monster, Mass		
Lightning	1	Shocking Grasp		
Lightning	3	Lightning Bolt		
Lightning	4	Call Lightning		
Lightning	5	Lightning Storm		
Lightning	6	Chain Lightning		
Location	0	Detect Snares and Pits		
Location	1	Locate Object		
Location	2	Status		
Location	3	Obscure Object		
Location	4	Locate Creature		
Location	8	Discern Location		
Lore	2	Fox’s Cunning		
Lore	3	Zone of Truth 		
Lore	5	Find the Path		
Lore	6	Legend Lore 		
Lore	7	Vision		
Making	1	Mount		
Making	1	Tenser’s Floating Disk		
Making	2	Web		
Making 	3	Phantom Steed		
Making	4	Evard’s Black Tentacles		
Making	5	Bigby’s Interposing Hand		
Making	6	Bigby’s Forceful Hand		
Making	7	Bigby’s Grasping Hand		
Making	8	Bigby’s Clenched Fist		
Making	9	Bigby’s Crushing Hand		
Perception	0	Guidance		
Perception	1	Comprehend Languages		
Perception	2	Augury		
Perception	3	Clairaudience / Clairvoyance		
Perception	8	Moment of Prescience 		
Perception	9	Foresight		
Phasing	5	Passwall		
Phasing	6	Ethereal Jaunt		
Phasing	7	Phase Door		
Phasing	8	Plane Shift		
Phasing	9	Ethereality 		
Radiance	0	Light		
Radiance	1	Color Spray		
Radiance	2	Glitterdust		
Radiance	3	Daylight		
Radiance	3	Searing Light		
Radiance	4	Rainbow Pattern		
Radiance	7	Prismatic Spray		
Radiance 	8	Prismatic Wall		
Radiance	8	Sunburst		
Radiance	9	Prismatic Sphere		
Radiance	9	Scintillating Pattern		
Resistance	0	Resistance		
Resistance 	1	Endure Elements		
Resistance	2	Resist Energy 		
Resistance 	3	Magic Circle Against Good / Evil / Law / Chaos		
Resistance	4	Spell Immunity		
Resistance	5	Spell Resistance		
Resistance	6	Anti-Magic Field		
Resistance	8	Spell Immunity, Greater		
Resonance	0	Ghost Sound		
Resonance	1	Ventriloquism		
Resonance	2	Shatter		
Resonance	4	Shout		
Resonance	8	Shout, Greater		
Resonance	9	Wail of the Banshee		
Restoration  	0	Mending		
Restoration	2	Restoration (lesser)		
Restoration	3	Remove Blindness / Deafness		
Restoration	4	Restoration		
Restoration	6	Regeneration		
Restoration	7	Restoration, Greater		
Scrying	3	Arcane Eye		
Scrying	4	Scrying		
Scrying	5	Prying Eyes		
Scrying	7	Scrying, Greater		
Scrying	8	Prying Eyes, Greater		
Shadow	2	Darkness		
Shadow	3	Deeper Darkness		
Shadow	4	Shadow Conjuration		
Shadow	6	Shadow Walk		
Shadow	9	Shades		
Shielding	1	Shield		
Shielding	2	Protection from Arrows		
Shielding	3	Protection from Energy		
Shielding	4	Globe of Invulnerability, Lesser		
Shielding	6	Globe of Invulnerability		
Slumber	0	Daze		
Slumber	1	Sleep		
Slumber	3	Deep Slumber 		
Slumber	4	Dream		
Slumber	5	Symbol of Sleep		
Slumber	8	Temporal Stasis 		
Summoning	4	Dismissal		
Summoning	5	Planar Ally, Lesser		
Summoning	6	Banishment		
Summoning	8	Planar Ally, Greater		
Summoning	9	Binding		
Teleportation	4	Dimension Door		
Teleportation	5	Teleport		
Teleportation	7	Teleport, Greater		
Teleportation	8	Teleportation Circle		
Teleportation	9	Imprisonment / Freedom 		
Transformation	1	Enlarge / Reduce Person		
Transformation	2	Alter Self		
Transformation 	2	Bull’s Strength		
Transformation	3	Shrink Item		
Transformation	4	Polymorph		
Transformation 	5	Animal Growth		
Transformation	5	Polymorph Other		
Transformation	6	Tenser’s Transformation		
Transformation	8	Iron Body		
Transformation	9	Shapechange		
Arcana	0	Arcane Mark		
Arcana	1	Detect Magic		
Arcana	1	Read Magic		
Arcana	3	Arcane Sight		
Arcana	3	Dispel Magic		
Arcana	5	Permanency		
Arcana	6	Analyze Dewomer		
Arcana	6	Dispel Magic, Greater		
Arcana	7	Arcane Sight, Greater		
Arcana	7	Spell Turning		
Veiling	2	Blur		
Veiling	3	Displacement		
Veiling	3	Nondetection 		
Veiling	5	False Vision		
Veiling	5	Mordenkainen’s Private Sanctum		
Veiling	6	Seeming		
Veiling	6	Veil		
Veiling	7	Mind Blank		
Veiling	7	Sequester		
Veiling	8	Screen		
Vitality	0	Cure Minor Wounds		
Vitality	1	Cure Light Wounds		
Vitality	3	Cure Serious Wounds		
Vitality 	4	Neutralize Poison		
Vitality 	5	Cure Critical Wounds		
Vitality	6	Heal		
Warding	1	Alarm		
Warding	2	Arcane Lock		
Warding	2	Fire Trap		
Warding	3	Explosive Runes		
Warding	4	Glyph of Warding		
Warding	5	Glyph of Warding, Greater		
Warding	6	Glyphs and Wards		
Warding	6	Symbol of Persuasion		
Warding 	7	Symbol of Stunning		
Warding 	7	Symbol of Weakness		
Water	1	Obscuring Mist		
Water	2	Fog Cloud		
Water	3	Water Breathing		
Water	4	Water Walk		
Water	5	Solid Fog		








  

Summoning Magic

Summoning magic is the process of calling upon one of the non-divine spirits of Talumh itself to gain access to their powers. This magic can only be accomplished through a ritual process, and may only be done with the permission of the spirit in question. These spirits do not give their powers willingly, choosing only to work through those who have made a ritual pact with them. Summoners are the only ones who have the ability to make these pacts, and thus are the only magic users who may call upon this type of power. Even when a pact has been negotiated, they are other steps that need to be taken prior to using a spirit’s power. Summoners must be cautious not to offend the spirits that are bound to them – doing so may cause the spirit to break their pact with the Summoner causing a loss of access to their abilities. Whether this loss is temporary or permanent is dependent on the severity of the infraction, and nature of the spirit in question.  
Three ritual steps must be performed in order for a Summoner to call on the powers of a particular spirit. First, they must negotiate a binding pact with the spirit. Next, they must call upon the spirit to manifest itself in the physical world. Finally, the Summoner may ritually invoke the powers of this spirit via its manifestation.  
Making a Pact
For a Summoner to call upon a particular spirit’s powers, they must first negotiate a ritual pact with it. The first step in this process is to locate the spirit’s physical manifestation on the material plane of Talumh. This process can be quite difficult. Each spirit only manifests itself in one particular place in the world, a place of power unique to the spirit itself. These manifestation often only occur during specific conditions as well, such as a particular day of the year, alignment of the stars, phase of the moon, or other such phenomena. 
Once a manifestation appears, the Summoner may then attempt to negotiate with the spirit to form a pact to call upon their powers. This pact is made via a skill check using the Diplomacy skill. The base DC for this check is 15, modified by a number of circumstances outlined on the table below.. During the negotiation of the pact, the spirit will ask the character a number of questions to attempt to determine if they are worthy of its powers. DMs are encouraged to give a bonus to the Diplomacy roll for characters who role play through this experience. 
Certain actions the Summoner has taken in the past also inspire both negative and positive reactions on the part of the spirits. These events are listed as part of the entry for each spirit, outlined below. Note that these spirits are ancient and very perceptive beings and are very difficult to lie to successfully. Any attempt at subterfuge incurs a -10 penalty to any associated Bluff check.
Note that alignment based bonuses and penalties do not stack, and may only be taken once. For example, if a Lawful Good Summoner was attempting to negotiate a pact with a Chaotic Good spirit, they would receive a -5 penalty on their Diplomacy check – a +5 bonus for being similar on the Evil / Good end of the spectrum, and a -10 penalty for being opposed on the Law / Chaos end of the spectrum. 

Circumstance	Check Modifier	
Summoners is the same Alignment as the spirit	+15	
Summoner is of similar alignment on the Law/Chaos spectrum	+10	
Summoner is of similar alignment on the Good/Evil spectrum	+5	
Summoner is of diametrically opposed alignment	-15	
Summoner is of opposed alignment on the Law/Chaos spectrum	-10	
Summoner is of opposed alignment on the Good/Evil spectrum	-5	
Summoner has performed an action the spirit considers virtuous. 	+10	
Summoner has performed an action the spirit considers forbidden. 	-10	
Summoner brings the spirit a preferred gift	+5	
Summoner fails at an attempt to Bluff the spirit	-10	
For each previously failed attempt at bonding with this spirit 	-5	
Summoner has previously broken a pact with this spirit for any reason	-10	
Summoner has previous voluntarily broken a pact with any spirit	-5 (culmulative)	

A successful check on this Diplomacy roll indicates the spirit is willing to make a pact with the Summoner. This character may now call on the spirit’s power as outlined below. At Summoner may not make a pact with a spirit once they have reached their maximum number of pacts as defined by their class level (Table 2.x, pg. xx) – attempting to do so always counts as a failure. Multi-class characters who wish to make a pact with a spirit must also take one level in the Summoner class prior to attempting to negotiate a pact.  

Breaking a Pact
Once a pact has been made with a spirit, it cannot be lightly broken. Bonding with one of these spirits leaves an imprint on a Summoner’s soul, and when this piece is ripped away there may be dire consequences.  Like any negotiated agreement, one party may feel the need to break these pacts however. 
The most common way for a pact between a spirit and a Summoner to be broken is by the Summoner taking an action the spirit considers antithetical to its being. For example, a Summoner who has a pact with a spirit that considers premeditated murder to be a forbidden act and willingly commits such a killing will likely have the spirit break its pact with them. In such a circumstance, the Summoner will be unable to call on this spirit’s powers until the matter is resolved. Sometime within 24 hours of the action in question taking place, the Summoner must spend 1 hour in communication with the spirit. After this time has elapsed, make a Diplomacy check in the same way you would when making a pact with a spirit as outlined above. If this roll is successful, the pact holds. If it fails, the spirit will break their pact with the Summoner.  This does not mean the Summoner may not make a new pact with this particular spirit, but they must do so in the same way as proscribed above. 
Another way a pact can be broken is voluntarily by the Summoner. To do this, the Summoner calls forth the spirit via the ritual of manifestation (outlined below), and dismisses it. The Summoner may attempt to bond with this spirit again in the usual manner, though they will take a significant penalty when attempting to do so as outlined on table 4.x above. 
Either way a pact is broken, there are consequences for the Summoner. Reduce this character’s experience point total by 5% (round up). This loss of experience is permanent, and cannot be recovered by any magical or divine means. This character does not reduce in character or class level if this loss brings them below the point total they would need to maintain their current level, though characters who were prepared to advance in level and have not done so when this effect takes place must re-gain the experience points necessary to advance.
Manifestation
Once a Summoner has made a pact with a spirit, they must first give the spirit an anchor in the physical realm outside its place of power in order to call on its abilities. This is done via a process called manifestation. To manifest a spirit, a Summoner spends an hour in intense meditation and communication with the spirit they wish to call on. During this period, the Summoner draws an intricate symbol inside a circle, a device unique to each spirit called a sigil. A sigil is implanted in a Summoner’s mind during the bonding process, and is recalled from memory when the spirit is manifested. In order to draw a sigil, a Summoner must have access to a surface of any sort (excepting lead or meteorite iron) to draw it on, and some sort of marking device that will imprint on the surface. Anything can be used from paper and pencil, to paint on a wall, to marking with one’s finger in the dirt. As long as the sigil is able to be drawn, the ritual can be completed.  
When the hour has elapsed, the player rolls a Wisdom check against DC 15. Success indicates the ritual was successful, failure indicates a fault on the part of the Summoner such as a lack of focus when calling up the spirit, mistakes made when drawing the sigil, etc. After a failed manifestation roll, a Summoner must wait 24 hours before attempting to manifest this particular spirit again. The Wisdom check associated with attempting to manifest a spirit may be modified by factors listed on the table below. In addition, by adding 3 extra hours to the ritual, a Summoner may take 10 on their roll. In the event of a failed manifestation, the Summoner may continue to call upon the powers of the spirit they had previously manifested (if any).  
Circumstance	Check Modifier	
Summoner has ranks in the Craft – Drawing Skill	+1 for every 2 ranks (round down)	
Summoner is of the same alignment as the spirit 	+2	
Summoner is of diametrically opposed alignment from the spirit	-3	
Summoner is present in the spirit’s place of power	+10	
Summoner is on another plane of existence 	-10	

After a successful manifestation, the drawn sigil manifests itself physically, serving as a link to the material world for the spirit. The materials and properties of each sigil are unique to a given spirit, as outlined by their entry below. The sigil must be kept in the Summoner’s possession at all time while they have manifested a spirit. At any time a sigil is handled by anyone else, physically destroyed, or moves more than 5 feet from the Summoner’s body, it immediately disintegrates and the manifestation of the spirit ends. A new manifestation ritual must be completed before the Summoner may call upon this spirit’s powers again. 
A Summoner may manifest no more than one spirit at any given time. Any given manifestation has no expiration or time limit however – it continues as long as the Summoner allows it to and their pact with the spirit remains active (see above). A manifestation may be ended at will, and whenever the Summoner manifests a new spirit, the manifestation of the previous spirit is considered concluded. 
Summoning a Spirit’s Powers
Once a spirit has been manifested, a Summoner may call on its powers via the process of summoning. Summoning is similar in many way to standard spellcasting. Each summoning has a casting time, an area of effect, a duration, and other such properties. Each spirit has five distinct abilities grouped into power levels call Circles. Like any other type of magic user, a Summoner may access different Circles and use a number of Circle abilities based on their level in this class (Table 2.x, pg. xx). Like using other spells, concentration is required to complete a summoning – Summoners must roll a Concentration check under standard spellcasting circumstances while performing a summoning, and a failed check means the power they were calling on is lost, counting against their total for the day. 
Treat all of a spirit’s powers as spell-like abilities for the purpose of overcoming resistance, saving throws, anti-magic or dispelling effects, etc. Unless otherwise noted, powers the invoke spell-like effects are cast as a spell at the Summoner’s character level in this class. 
When a spirit is called on to access its powers, it makes its presence clearly known. The effects listed below are cumulative.  No magical effects can be used to dampen these physical manifestations of a spirit when it is called on.  These effects are present during the entire casting time of the power, and fade after 1 round. 
?	When a Summoner uses a 1st or 2nd Circle or greater power, they are outlined in a brilliant aura of the spirit’s aura colors. 
?	A 3rd, 4th or greater Circle power causes a brilliant representation of the spirits sigil to be drawn beneath the caster. 
?	A 5th circle power calls up an illusory version of the spirit’s physical manifestation. This manifestation is clearly an illusion as it can be seen through, but it can nonetheless have a powerful fear effect on weaker creatures. All creature of less than have the Summoner’s class level (round down) in HD who view this manifestation must make a morale check against DC 15. Failure causes them to flee in terror for 1d4 rounds. Success means they are shaken for 1 round. 
Passive Effects
In addition to the Circles of power a Summoner may call upon, each spirit has a passive magical effect associated with it as well. These effects remain active for as long as the spirit is manifested. Treat these passive effects as supernatural abilities.  

Spirits of Talumh 
There are a total of forty known spirits of Talumh which have the ability to bond with Summoners. Many may still await discovery, a worthy quest for any Summoner. Several of these spirits are listed below as examples. For a Summoner to determine the specific properties of a spirit prior to bonding with it, they must spend a week endeavoring to learn about the spirit by discussing it with other Summoners if available, reading in a large library or other type of archive, or other such research. Once this period has elapsed, make a check with the skill Knowledge (Spirits of Talumh). The result of this check reveals the information as outlined below. Note that the amount of information gleaned by this check is cumulative.  

Check DC	Information Revealed	
10	Name of the spirit	
12	The spirit’s elemental type and its first circle power	
14	Some basic lore about the spirit – its genesis, stories about its interactions with others, etc. 	
16	The spirit’s second circle power	
18	The spirit’s preferred gift	
20	The spirit’s Virtuous action	
22	The spirit’s alignment 	
24	The spirit’s third circle power	
26	The spirit’s Forbidden action	
28	The spirit’s fifth circle power	
30	The spirit’s place of power	

Capal Usice, the Water Bearer
Place of Power: 	Mismi Waterfall, Lake Janelia, the Twelve Sisters Region, the Expanse
Physical Manifestation: 	A white skinned, wingless faerie girl wearing a fuzzy brown loincloth with russet hair and eyes and carrying a plain clay jug of lake water that is much too big for her.  
Alignment: 	Chaotic Good
Sigil Material: 	Woven lake grass, always wet
Aura Colors: 		Blue, White, Brown, and Green
Virtuous Action: 		Saving someone from drowning
Forbidden Action: 		Needlessly polluting a body of fresh water
Preferred Gift: 		A masterwork water container such as a pail, bucket, flask, or beaker
Description: 	Capal Uscie (pronounced cap-el ooh-shee) is a playful lake spirit, intimately associated with Lake Janelia in particular, and the Twelve Sisters chain of lakes in general.  Local legends tell stories of her rescuing many Lakemen from a death by drowning, and she is considered by the peoples of the region to be a good spirit. Local superstition holds that a sighting of Capal Usice brings good luck in fishing. She can be vengeful toward those who exploit the lakes and their creatures however. This spirit has a somewhat childish temperament.  

1st Circle: Create Water	
Cast as a Cleric of the same Level	


2nd Circle: Blast of Water						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
Full Round Action	30 ft. 	1 target / round	1 round / 2 levels	Reflex to Avoid	No	
This effect generates a forceful blast of water which spurts fourth from the Summoner’s palms toward a targeted creature. The blast deals 1d6 points of damage per creature struck. Treat any creature successfully struck by this effect as if they were the victim of a bull rush and an overrun by a small sized attacker with a  strength of 10 + the Summoner’s class level.  						

3rd Circle: Quench Fire						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
Full Round Action	60 ft.	30 ft. Radius	1 round / 3 caster levels	See Text	Yes	
This effect generates a temporary zone highly attended to the elemental plane of water. All fires within the area of effect are immediately extinguished. During the duration of this ability, it is not possible to create fire in the area of effect. All attempts to use spells, spell like abilities, breath weapons, etc. in which are fire based are immediately nullified. Use of such abilities or spells still counts toward a character’s normal allotment of their uses, spell slots, etc. Creatures with the Fire sub-type within the area of effect take 1d8 points of damage, +1 per class level of the Summoner, per round – a Fortitude save reduces the damage to half.  						

4th Circle: Water Spout 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
Full Round Action	60 ft. 	See text	1 round / 3 caster levels	Reflex to Avoid	No	
This effect creates a powerful water spout beneath one targeted square. It can lift up to 50 lbs. of creatures in the effected square per caster level, and lifts them 5 feet for every 2 levels of the Summoner (rounded down). By reducing the maximum height of the spout by 10 feet, the caster can expand its area of effect by one additional square. Note that the area of effect must include a square or rectangular shape – it can therefore only be expanded to effect 2, 4, 6, or 8 squares in total. Creatures lifted by the spout make a reflex save against DC 15 for every round of its duration, or they fall from it. Those held in the spout may make no additional actions aside from this reflex save for the duration of the spell. Creatures dropped this way suffer 1d6 damage for every 10 feet they fall. Creatures held in the spout are gently lowered when the duration expires, a process lasting 1 round. They must make the same reflex at the beginning of this round or be dropped as well. 						


5th Circle: Healing Water						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
2 Full Rounds	Caster	50 ft.	1 round	No	No	
This effect generates a shower of golden rain centered on the caster. Creatures allied with the Summoner who invokes this effect are healed of 4d8 hit points and 1d4 points of ability damage to any affected abilities. Curses, Poison effects, baleful polymorphs, and other similar effects are also removed from these recipients. 						

Passive Effect: +4 on all saves vs. fire-based effects	

Gorosei, the Guardian of the Northern Waste
Place of Power: 	Journeyman’s Grave, The Shining Plain, The Pale
Physical Manifestation: 	A huge raven with red tail feathers and piercing green eyes
Alignment: 	Neutral
Sigil Material: 	Dried sticks, small bones, and bits of grass
Aura Colors: 	White, pale blue, and turquoise 
Virtuous Action: 	Sharing food with a starving creature
Forbidden Action: 	Unnecessarily forcing a creature to starve 
Preferred Gift: 	Colored marbles or glass beads
Description: 	This spirit takes a more active interest in its chosen lands than most.  It often manifests a physical form, w

1st Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

2nd Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

3rd Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

4th Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

5th Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						

Revenant, the Avenger of the Slain
Place of Power: 	Bloodstone circle, Redfirs Forest, the Expanse
Physical Manifestation:  	A giant humanoid skeleton almost totally covered in a sewn-together bear skin showing only its chest cavity and face with glowing red eyes. 
Alignment: 	Neutral 
Sigil Material: 	Bone and iron, glows faintly red
Aura Colors: 	Bone White, Iron Grey, Red, and Brown
Virtuous Action: 	Bringing a murderer to justice
Forbidden Action: 	Knowingly killing an innocent being
Preferred Gift: 	A black rose
Description: 	The site this spirit originally tended was the site of a terrible battle between Men and the Tuthá during the Great War. Once a calm and peaceful spirit, Revenant was irrevocably changed as the result of this battle.  This spirit is now devoted to the elimination of unnecessary violence, and to using its powers to punish those who commit it.  

1st Circle: Stunning Blast						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
1 Standard Action	20ft +5ft per caster level	1 target creature / 3 caster levels	1 round / 3 caster levels	Reflex to avoid, Will to resist	No	
This effect stuns the target creature if it fails a Will save vs.  DC 10 +1 per caster level. Creatures of up to 2 levels / HD higher than the caster’s level may be affected. 						

2nd Circle: Paralytic Aura						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
1 Standard Action	20ft	1 Target	1 round / level	See Text	No	
The target of this effect is endowed with an aura that prevents them from being attacked. The next time this target it the subject of a melee attack, their attacker must make a Will save or be paralyzed for a number of rounds equal to the caster’s level. 						

3rd Circle: Aura of Fear						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
1 Standard Action	20ft	1 Target	1 round / level	Will to resist	No	
Any creature who attacks the target must make a save vs. DC 10 +1 per Summoner level or be shaken for a number of rounds equal to half the Summoner’s level (round down). This power may af						


4th Circle: Retributive Strike						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
1 Standard Action	20ft	1 Target	1 round / level	See Text	No	
Targets of this effect receive an aura that deals damage back at their attackers. Whenever this target is the subject of a successful melee attack during the power’s duration, the attacker receives an equal amount of damage in return. A successful Fortitude save reduces the damage by half. 						

5th Circle: Preemptive Attack						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
Full Round Action	20ft	1 Target	1 round / level	No	No	
Targets of this effect receive a powerful protection from their attackers. As long as this power is in effect, an attack of opportunity is provoked whenever the target is attacked, allowing them to strike their opponents before they are attacked. This special attack of opportunity may only be invoked once per round, and does not count toward a character’s regular attacks of opportunity. 						

Passive Effect: All attacks against this Summoner receive a -1 penalty	


Spirit Name
Place of Power: 
Physical Manifestation: 
Alignment: 
Sigil Material: 
Aura Colors: 
Virtuous Action: 
Forbidden Action: 
Preferred Gift: 
Description: 

1st Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

2nd Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

3rd Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

4th Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

5th Circle: 						
Casting Time	Range	Area of Effect	Duration	Saving Throw	Resistance	
						
						

Passive Effect: 	
	









Ritual Magic
Ritual Magic is a form of divine magic practiced by Witches. This magic is fueled by the divine power invested in the protectors of Talumh, the Lord and the Lady. In essence, it is thus drawn from the world of Talumh itself. Powerful in its application and effects, Ritual Magic nonetheless suffers a number of limitations inherent in its nature. The first among these is the rituals used to invoke its powers. These rituals are extremely complex in nature, requiring a number of verbal, somatic, and material components, and taking hours to complete.  Individual Witches are also limited in their ability to understand and complete these rituals, and only those who have proven worthy by using them responsibly will be granted access to higher circles of power. 

Invoking Ritual Magic 
The practice of the rites performed by Witches is referred to by them as an invocation or a ritual – these words seem to be used somewhat alternately to describe the same set of ideas. Essentially, the rituals performed by a Witch or group of Witches calls forth – or invokes – divine power from the Lord and the Lady to produce a magical effect. The invocations of ritual magic must be performed in chief by a Witch. The Witch leading such a ritual may be assisted by individuals trained to do so, be they Witches themselves or ordinary lay people who possess the knowledge to assist an invocation. 
An invocation involves a number of steps. The first of these is an opening ritual, whereby the participants in the invocation are spiritually cleansed of any “worldly” taint, after which a sacred space is ritually drawn around the perimeter of the area in which the invocation will take place.  The invocation then takes place over a number of hours, and can including such features as chants, material sacrifices, the use of blood, ritualistic dances, and other such elements. 
Regardless of their component natures, every ritual requires at least two basic components. The first of these is a Witch to the invocation. The other major component needed for any ritual is specially sanctified tool corresponding to the element most closely associated with the effects of the ritual in question.  Spells connected with the element of fire use a small dagger called an athame; those linked with air used a wand; water based spells use a glass globe of water sanctified by the Lord and Lady; and earth spells use a rod made of cold iron. Some spells may use a combination of these tools depending on their nature and effects. 

Spellcasting Mechanics for Ritual Magic
Whenever a ritual is invoked, the Witch leading the invocation makes a check using the DC of the ritual using the Spellcraft skill. A successful check means the ritual was successful and the sought after magical effect has been generated. Failure means the ritual was unsuccessful and the time carrying it out was wasted.  
Witches may be assisted in performing a ritual by other characters with the Spellcraft skill. A Witch may call upon the services of a certain number of assistants based on their class level. When using other characters to assist in a ritual, these characters also make a check against the on half of the DC of the ritual. If they are successful, the Witch leading the ritual adds a bonus to their Spellcraft check to complete the ritual. The tables below outline the effects of adding assistants to a ritual, and the number of assistants a Witch may call upon based on their class level. 

Circumstance	Check Modifier	
Assistant makes a successful check	+2	
Assistant makes check by more than 10 points	+1	
Assistant is a Witch	+2	

Character Level	Max. No of Assistants	
1		
4		
8		
12		
16		
20		

 






Feats
Break Ritual 






